boom and we're live hello sir how are
you hi thanks what you eaten chocolate
when you got here and you told me that
you are a cacao shaman and I said those
are strong words they are what does that
mean so I was in Berlin last year giving
a talk at a tech conference and somebody
invited me to a sacred cacao ceremony
never heard of it I thought wow that
sounds awesome I love chocolate I went
it was so wonderful and at the end they
were talking about these people these
great cacao shamans and I thought what
is that I gotta be one of those since I
came back I looked for certification
there wasn't certification I self
declared and then I started doing cacao
ceremonies in New York and I have
hundreds of people who come it's really
wonderful and it's exciting like if you
want to be a doctor you gotta go to
medical school right a comedian you got
to become a professional you gotta put
in your time cacao shaman just show up
it's like jingle hey I'm like a cow
shaman if anybody shuts up and they have
a good time then you're real now how
much do you need to know about cacao
like the nutritional properties of a
cacao is amazing it's great stuff it's
incredible and then so definitely cacao
and people have been using it
ceremonially for about 5,000 years so
it's incredible chocolate makes people
happy it helps your brain function your
circulation there's all these kinds of
incredible things but then the
ceremonies that I do have two key
messages one is you are the drug I mean
we all take people take drugs people
take ayahuasca and psilocybin all these
kinds of things but I also think that we
have for the things that we take drugs
for there's kind of release and
happiness and joy we have those things
inside of us and we just kind of get out
of our way we can experience them the
second thing is I believe that there are
no I say this in my Sarah moans there's
no such thing as sacred cacao or sacred
plants or sacred mountains or sacred
people if we don't treat life with
sacredness but if we recognize that
everything is sacred
then we infuse life with sacredness and
meaning and that's anyway that's why I
do it's a lot of fun that's very
interesting from a guy who specializes
essentially in manipulating life well
you know we have manipulated life as
humans for a very short on time but it's
but it's interesting
yeah you know the idea of things being
sacred but your specialty is
manipulating genetics right yeah well so
that is this strange moment that we're
in these for about for about 3.8 billion
years our species has evolved by this
set of principles we call Darwinian
evolution random mutation and natural
selection it's brought us here we used
to be single-cell organisms and now look
at us hmm and there's been a lot of
magic in that process and there still is
but we humans are deciphering some of
that magic we are like looking under the
hood of what it means to be human and we
are increasingly going to have the
ability to manipulate all of life
including our own yeah that is very
unnerving to a lot of people yeah it's
uncomfortable and scary and yeah it is
they like things the way they are we
only I'd like to stay the way I am we
always think that there's no we always
think that because there's a built-in
concern conservatism in our brains and
yet we live these lives that are
entirely dependent on these radical
changes that our ancestors have created
I mean we didn't find this building or
agriculture or medicine in nature we
built all those things then everybody
gets a new baseline when you're born and
you think well you know I'm I want the
organic corn mm-hmm I want whatever but
all these things are creation we live an
entirely created world and our ability
to manipulate and change that world is
always growing and I think we need to
recognize that but there's being afraid
is is okay and being excited is okay and
we need to find the right balance
between those two emotions I think for a
lot of people they feel like so many
changes happen
particularly when you talk about
genetically modified foods so many
things happened before they realized
they had happened so when they're like
hey man I don't want any eat any GMO
fruit well then you probably shouldn't
eat any fruit yep because everything
that you buy has been changed yeah every
orange that you buy that that's what an
orange used to be like yeah good buy an
apple apples didn't used to be like that
tomatoes didn't used to be like that now
I know that's we reset our baseline just
from when we were kids so if you went
back twelve thousand years ago
to the end of the last ice age and you
said all right find me all these things
that we buy at Whole Foods most of them
didn't exist we've created them sure and
then in the 1970s we had the ability to
do what's recombinant DNA people call
genetic modification and people are
afraid because it's well that feels
unnatural we're applying science to to
food and you know that's that's the
issue and now we're we're entering the
era of genetically modified humans and
there's that same level of
uncomfortableness but what happened the
reason why I've written this this book
hacking Darwin is that if we approach
genetically modified humans in the same
way they're we approach uniquely
modified foods which is the scientists
say hey we've got this we're gonna
manage them responsibly and it just kind
of happens to people people are gonna go
nuts
I mean you imagine how agitating people
are about GMO foods if they don't have a
say in how the genetic the experience
the human experience of genetic
modification plays out people are going
to go berserk so we have this window of
time we can start bringing everybody
into an inclusive conversation about
where we're going because where we are
going is just radically different from
where we've been yeah I think it's an
awareness issue and I also think it's a
perception issue I think that everything
people do is natural including cities I
think cities our natural that's why
they're all over the world yeah I think
there is naturals beehives and I think
as much as we like to think that
technology is not natural it's clearly
something people naturally make of
course they make it in every culture
yeah I think it's the history of our
species and we kind of misused this word
naturally because what is natural I mean
maybe natural was when we used to live
and we were just part of nature I always
say it's like people say oh I love
nature I love like going out and hiking
in the woods the reason you love hiking
in the woods is that we've murdered all
the Predators it's like in the old days
and you stay in your cave you're not
going out and hiking in the woods
there's stuff that's gonna kill you out
there I know that was a massive luxury
to go wander through the forest with no
weapons yeah nobody did oh I want nature
I want my you know my natural corn I
want my my natural Chihuahua even though
you know 25 thousand years ago there's
no
chihuahuas or wolves wolves yeah and
look what we've done to them I know
we'll look what we have done to them
yeah them pugs yeah if you had natural
wheat like or natural corn in particular
natural corn spent a tiny little thing
yes a few a few weeds yeah weird gross
little bout grain yeah and then now we
made it this big juicy sweet delicious
thing you put butter on which is great
but we grate we cannot have glyphosate
glyphosate but we can't we can't
fetishize that there's some kind of
imaginary world where kind of everybody
was wearing Birkenstocks and eating in
Whole Foods that imaginary world sucked
for us that's why we left it it's true
but there's some sort of a balance right
we we do appreciate the nature aspect of
our world and Eagles and salmon and all
these wild things and to be able to see
them as very cool yeah but yeah you
don't want to get eaten by those things
you don't want them everywhere you you
want to be able to go out and get your
newspaper without being worried about
getting attacked by a Jaguar it helps
yeah you when you think about the future
at least me then we tell you my concern
yeah I'm worried that rich people are
gonna get a hold this technology quick
and they're going to have massive unfair
advantages in terms of intellect in
terms of physical athletic ability Ulta
I mean we we really can have a grossly
imbalanced world radically quickly if
this happens fast when we don't
understand exactly what the consequences
of these actions are until it's too late
and then we try to play catch-up with
rules and regulations and laws yeah
that's a very very real danger and
that's why I've written this book that's
why I'm out speaking every day about
this in this topic because we need to
recognize that if we have if we approach
these revolutionary technologies using
the same values that we experience today
we're you know we're here and very
comfortable but just down the road there
are people who are just who are living
without many opportunities there are
people in parts of the world like
Central African Republic where there's
just a war zone kids are born
malnourished if those are our values
today we can expect that when these
future technologies arrive we'll use
those the
the same value so it's real and right
now we have an opportunity to say all
right these technologies are coming
whatever we do these technologies are
coming there's a better possible future
and a worse possible future and how can
we infuse our best values into the
process to optimize the good stuff and
minimize the bad stuff and certainly
what you're saying is a real risk thing
of what happened when European countries
had slightly better weapons and slightly
better ships than everybody else they
took over the world and dominated
everybody and so yeah that's it's very
real that's the government's need to
play a role in ensuring broad access and
in regulating these these technologies
to make sure we don't get to that kind
of dystopian scenario that you've laid
out well it's also in terms of
governments regulating things like why
are they qualified who are they who are
the government's or just people
right there's people that are either
elected or that you know or yeah some
sort of a monarchy or you you're dealing
with either kings and queens and sheiks
or you're dealing with presidents and
we've seen in this country that
sometimes our presidents don't know what
the fuck they're talking about right so
who are they to disrupt science just to
disrupt this natural flow of Technology
well we designed we need somebody to do
it we need some representation of our
collective will but just to avoid some
of the things like you just like you
just mentioned that that's the reason
why humans banded together and made
these kind of created governments and
the reason for democracy especially if
you have more functioning democracies is
that your government in some ways
reflects the will of the people and the
government does things that individuals
can't do and I know there are other
libertarian arguments well everyone
should just like if you want a little
road in front of your house either go
build the road or you can pay somebody
but they're a lot of things in even in
that model that won't get done there are
a lot of kind of big national even
global concerns that you need some kind
of of regulation because what we're
talking about is the future of life and
run life on Earth and there have to be
some kind of guardrails and that's why
what I'm arguing for is we really need a
bottom-up I think we every person and
that's why I'm so thrilled to be here
with you today Joe every person needs to
read
understand these revolutionary
technologies like genetics like AI and
all of our responsibilities and
opportunities to say hey this is really
important here are the values that I
think the that I cherish and just like
you said I don't want it to be that the
wealthiest people are the ones who have
kids with higher IQs and live longer and
healthier than everybody else and then
so we have to raise our voice and there
needs to be a bottom-up process and a
top-down process and it's really hard
the many people have a concern that
someone else is going to do what we're
not willing to do first yes right
they're worried China and Russia those
are the big ones China and Russia
especially China yeah they're very
technologically advanced and their
innovations off-the-chain when it comes
to the qua way just recently surpassed
apples the number two cell phone
manufacturer right in the world five
years ago they had some like a
single-digit share look at the
marketplace now they're number two on
the planet Earth I mean they they hustle
and if they just decide to make super
people and they they do it before we do
that's what people were worried about
right there were yeah they're worried
about these trivial things
we're seemingly trivial like athletics
and then there's things that are really
Chris to stop people from just becoming
the Hulk what's to stop people from
becoming immortal
what's the studying whiz well two
questions first is is China I think it's
a really big issue the 21st the story of
the 21st century one of the biggest
stories of the 21st century will be how
the us-china rivalry plays out and the
playing field will be with these
revolutionary technologies and China has
a national plan to lead the world in
these technologies by 2050 they're
putting huge resources they have really
smart people they are really focused on
that and it's a big deal yeah in genetic
technologies when last year of the book
hacking darm was already in production
in November when it was announced that
these first genetically engineered
babies had been born in China and so I
called the publisher and say we need to
pull this back out of productions I need
to reference this but it didn't require
much of a chain of so I'd already
written this is happening we're going to
see the world
edited humans it's going to happen first
in China and here's why so I said had
had to add a few sentences saying and it
just happened in in October of 2018 so
China is on that path and we need to
recognize that on one hand the United
States needs to be competitive on the
other hand we don't want a runway arms
race of the human race and that's why we
need to find this balance between
national ambition and some kind of
global rules but it's really hard to do
yeah and the other thing is that we're
competing with them yeah and so if they
decide to do it first we're almost
compelled to do it second or compel to
try to keep up yeah but how far away do
you think we are from physically
manipulating living human beings versus
fetuses versus yes something in the wool
so physically manipulating living human
beings we're there yeah yeah so that's
it may often it's it's called gene
therapy so for example there's a whole
class of treatments for for treating
cancer called Carty therapy so you have
a cancer when you're younger your body
is better able to fight cancers what you
can do some of the cancer you take their
cells you give their you manipulate
their cells to give them cancer fighting
superpowers and you put them back into
the person's body and now the person's
body behaves like you're a younger
person you have the ability to fight
back so gene therapies are already
happening
a relatively small number of them have
already been approved but there is a
list of thousands of them with
regulators in applications to regulators
around the world so that the era of in
making genetic changes to living humans
that's already here look what can they
do with it so far so so far most of it
is focused on treating diseases but a
lot more is is coming because when
people think about the the human the
genome our genome isn't a disease genome
it's not a health care gene genome it's
a human genome and so we are going to be
able to do things that feel like crazy
things like changing people's eye color
changing people's skin color to funky
things I mean there's a lot of there
were stuff that we're not doing now that
we will be be able to do and they are
anything we offer so like that ten years
so in ten years we're gonna have green
people if in if someone so yeah if
someone so chooses makes well they'll be
able to go back to normal car well if
it's it's a good question and if it's
with this kind of gene therapy and it's
a small number of genes probably but we
are messing with very complex systems
that we don't fully understand it and
that's why there's a lot of unknowns and
coming back to your point on regulation
that's why we I don't think we want a
total free-for-all or feel say hey I'm
gonna enter my own genes yeah and you
don't want some backyard hustler yeah
it's true lab it's true cuz that you're
saying about the Hulk yeah I mean I just
think that there are all kinds of yeah
we're humans were diverse any kind of
thing that you can think of there is a
range and there's you know crazy on the
left and crazy on the right and crazy on
the top so people are gonna want to do
things and the question is if with any
society what do we think is okay and
what do we think is not okay and and
maybe there should be some I believe
there should be some limit to how far
people can go with experimenting
certainly the possibly likely on
themselves is certainly on their future
children certainly on their future
children yeah but once you're 18 I think
do it over the fuck you want if you
really well maybe 25 25 25 bills with
gills it's like I will like it see life
like the tattoo seemed like a good idea
yeah well we probably will yeah so you
think we're probably 50 years away from
that being a reality so I think that we
are we the genetic revolution has
already begun and it's going to
fundamentally change our lives in in
three big areas the first is our health
care so we're moving from a system of
generalized health care based on
population averages so that when you go
to your doctor you're treated because
you're a human just based on average and
we're moving to a world of personalized
medicine and the foundation of your
personalized health care will be your
sequence genome in your electronic
health records that's how they know you
are you and that's how they can say this
is a drug this isn't intervention that
will work for you we do that then we're
going to have to sequence everybody so
we're gonna have about two billion
people have had their whole genome
sequence within a within a decade and
then we're
to be able to compare what the genes say
to how those genes are expressed and
then humans become a big data set and
that's going to move us from precision
to predictive healthcare where you're
going to be just born and you're going
to have all this information or your
parents love all this stuff about how
certain really important aspects of your
life are going to play on some of that
is going to be disease related but some
of that's just going to be life related
like you have a better-than-average
chance of being really great at math or
having a high IQ or low IQ or being a
great sprinter how do we think about
that and then again a revolution that's
already happening we're just going to
change the way we make babies we're
going to get away from sex as the
primary mechanism for conceiving our
kids we'll still have sex for all the
great reasons we do and that's going to
open up a whole new world of just of how
of applying science to what it means to
be a human with a lot of new
possibilities that's what's gonna be so
freaky when people stop having sex to
make kids and they make ads in a lab
every kid's me in the lab when not only
that I think we're going to move to an
era an era where people who have who
make babies through sex will be seen as
taking a risk kind of like people who
don't vaccinate their kids where it's
natural tonight it's more natural to not
vaccinate your kids than to do it but
people say wait a second you're taking
on a risk on behalf of your kids about
three percent of all kids in the world
are born with some kind of harmful
genetic abnormality using in vitro
fertilization and embryo screening that
three percent can be brought down
significantly and what happens if you
see somebody twenty years from now who
has a kid with one of those preventable
diseases do you think that's fate or do
you think well on wait a second those
parents they made an ideological
decision about how they wanted to
conceive their kids so I think we're
moving toward some really deep and
fundamental changes hmm well yeah that's
that's an interesting conversation of
whether or not you wonder what if we're
ever gonna get to a point where people
don't allow people sort of like people
don't allow people to not get vaccinated
right like there's a lot of that going
on today which is great right you don't
want diseases floating around
but what if that gets to the place where
we do that with people with people
creating new life-forms what if you said
hey you are being irresponsible you're
just having sex and having a kid yeah I
know that's how your grandma did it we
don't do it that way in 2099 yeah I
think it's gonna be hard to do that in a
society like the United States but in a
country like North Korea they'll be able
to do that well or if a country if they
said look you can make babies however
you want but if you make babies the
old-fashioned way and if you have some
kind of genetic your kid has some kind
of genetic disorder that was preventable
we're just not going to cover it with
insurance so you're gonna have a ten
million dollar lifetime bill you don't
need to you don't need to require
something you can create an environment
where people's behaviors will change and
then there will be increasing social
pressures I mean right now you know
somebody sees some little kid riding
around their bicycle without a helmet
they're kind of looking at the parents
like hey what are you doing and how come
you don't have a helmet on your kids and
I just think that we're moving toward
this kind of societal change where
people will I believe see conceiving
their kids in lab as a saiful safer
alternative and it's not just safety
because once you do that then that opens
you up to the possibility of all other
kinds of applications of technology not
just not just to eliminate risks or
prevent disease but you have a lot more
information so already it's possible to
roughly rank order 15 pre implanted
embryos tallest to shortest in a decade
from highest genetic component of IQ to
lowest genetic component of IQs I mean
this stuff is very real and it's very
personal
what do you think will be the first
thing that people start manipulating I
think certainly health health is will be
the primary driver because that's every
parent's biggest fear and that's that is
what is going to be kind of the entry
application people wanting to make sure
that their kids don't suffer from
terrible genetic diseases and then I
think the second will probably be
longevity me right now there's a lot of
work going going on sequencing people
the super Agers people who live to their
late
people do 102 identify what what are the
genetic patterns that these people have
so it's like to live to 90 you have to
do all the things that you advocate
healthy living and whatever but to live
to end 100 you really need the genetics
to make that possible so we're going to
identify what are some of the genetic
patterns that allow you to live those
kinds of long lives but then after that
then it's wide open I mean it's it's
higher genetic component of IQ outgoing
personality faster sprinter I mean we
are humans we are primarily genetic
beings and we are going to be able to
look under the hood of what it means to
be human and we'll have these incredible
choices and and we have it's a huge
responsibility how long do you think
before you have a person with four arms
I think it's gonna take a long time
couple hundred years well the thing is
here's how I see it so the real driver
there's two two primary drivers one will
be embryo selection so right now average
woman going through IVF has about 15
eggs extracted and then in IVF in vitro
fertilization those eggs are fertilized
using the male sperm and in average male
ejaculation there's about a billion
sperm cells so men are just giving it
away women human female mammals are a
little bit a little bit stingy but in
the next killer application is using a
process called induced pluripotent stem
cells and so shinigami naca this great
japanese scientist won the 2012 Nobel
Prize for developing a way to turn any
adult cell into a stem cell so a stem
cells the kind of cell it can be
anything and so you take let's say a
skin graft that has millions of cells
you induce those those adult skin cells
into stem cells so you use these for
things called Yamanaka factors and so
now you have let's call it a hundred
thousand stem cells and then you can
induce those cells into egg precursor
cells and then eggs so all of a sudden
humans are creating eggs like salmon on
this huge scale so you have a hundred
thousand eggs fertilize them with the
male sperm in a machine an automated
process you grow them for about five
days and then you sequence cells
extracted
from each one of those and the cost of
genome sequencing in 2003 was a billion
dollars and now it's 800 dollars it's
going to be next to nothing within a
decade and then you have real options
because then you get this this whole
spreadsheet an algorithm and then you go
to the parents say well what are your
priorities and maybe they'll say well I
want health
I want longevity I want high IQ when
you're choosing from big numbers like
that you have some real options and then
on top of that then there is this
precision gene editing the stuff that
happened in in China last year I think
it will be and then coming back to your
question about forearms I think it's
going to be varied people have this idea
the tools like CRISPR are gonna be used
someone's gonna sit at a computer and
say like four arms and three heads and
then wings and whatever it's pretty hard
because human biology is incredibly
complicated and we we always know more
but we're at the very beginning of
understanding the full complexity of
human biology enough to make these big
kind of changes but if you're choosing
from a hundred thousand fertilized eggs
those are all your natural kids yeah and
then you would get the best of that and
then work on those exactly that's
exactly the model you get that and then
you say alright what if you had like
twenty sons that were awesome and they
didn't tell you about eighteen of them
and you kept two of them then eighteen
of them they shipped off to some
military industrial complex turn them
into assassins any kind of crazy thing
you can think of that's the problem
right it's all this stuff will be
possible and so and a lot of
technologies you can imagine all kinds
of crazy stuff and that's coming back to
your earlier point about regulation is
we want to live in regulated
environments means so like now think of
the internet and you know in the
beginning days of the internet people
that I'll just let the internet be let
you know just let it play out it's gonna
liberate all of us and now China is
showing how the internet can be actually
be really actively used to suppress
people Facebook is taking people's
information and Google in a way that's
frightening a lot of people and feels
like hey it shouldn't be that these
companies can do whatever they want we
have to have some way of establishing
limits because not every individual is
able to entirely protect themselves they
don't have the power they don't have all
the information we need some
representatives helping us
the real concern is the competition
right the real concern is whether or not
we do something with reg in regards to
regulation that's somehow another
stifles competition on our end and
doesn't allow us to compete with Russia
and China yeah particularly China yeah
that's exactly right and so what we need
to do is to find that balance and one of
the big issues for this is privacy so if
you kind of look around the world I'd
say there's of the kind of the big
countries and groupings of countries
there's three models of privacy there's
Europe which has the strongest privacy
protections for all kinds of data
including genetic data there's China
that has the weakest and there's the
United States that has the middle and
the paradox is from an individual
perspective we are all are thinking well
we kind of want to be like Europe
because I don't want somebody accessing
my personal information especially my
genetic information this is like my most
intimate information but genetics is the
ultimate big data problem and so you
need these big data pools and you'd
access to these big data pools in order
to unlock the secrets of genetics so
these three different groupings
everyone's making a huge bet on the
future and the way we're going to know
who wins like right now in the in the IT
world we have Amazon and Apple and
Google and those big companies but
whoever gets this bet right they will be
the ones who will be leading the way and
making a huge amount of money on these
technology cuz we're talking about is a
trillion multi trillion dollar industry
how do you think this is gonna affect
things like competitive athletics hugely
so right now we have this problem
someone like Lance Armstrong is who is
doing he's manipulating his his body and
what he's basically doing is adding more
red blood cells so that he can carry
more oxygen and people feel that that's
cheating and it's it's a different topic
that probably everybody in the Tour de
France was doing exactly that when he
when he won but what if it which will be
the case we're going to be able to
sequence the people let's say nobody's
doing drugs and we sequence all these
athletes some of them will just have a
natural genetic advantage their bodies
will naturally be doing what lamps are
Lance Armstrong had manipulated his body
to do
that's happening with a sprinter right
now yeah well that female sprint yes has
high levels of tests yes yeah no and
it's Jenny I feel really sorry for her
yeah but we have categories I mean yeah
you with your world in mixed martial
arts I mean I think I remember in the
past there was some person who has who
was kind of a borderline on the head
between genders and was just kicking the
shit out of all of these women in cage
fighting it's like we have these
categories of man and woman we know that
the gender identities are our fluid but
how do we think about it when these
genetic differences confer advantages so
if your body is primed to do something
maybe you could have like a Plato's
Republic world where everybody that
fulfills a function that you are
genetically optimized to do and that you
could imagine that being a very
competitive kind of environment but what
do you do for now in something like the
Olympics if somebody has this huge
genetic advantage should we elect
somebody else manipulate their bodies
there's thing called gene doping mm-hmm
in order to change the expression of
gene so as your body to act like you're
as Jeanette naturally genetic enhanced
is somebody else it's complicated are
they capable of doing certain physical
enhancements through gene doping right
now yeah like what can they do right now
no no so the way it works is so your
genes instruct your cells to make
proteins that's that's its that's how
the whole system works so you can change
genes or you can trigger the expression
of proteins so you can get people's
bodies to behave as if they had the
these appreciated optimization yeah yeah
and so that's why now the the world
anti-doping agency I mean they are now
starting to look at gene doping and this
is the first time that that's that
that's even being considered as a
category and then there are have they're
people that have done that are there
people that have done that successfully
you know I don't know the answer to that
I know that wada is looking for it which
makes me assume that it must have done
but I haven't seen it I've looked for it
I haven't seen any reports and it starts
winning everything what China is so so
my my wrote my one of my sci-fi novels
Jenna
this code was about this so China as you
know has their system of their Olympic
sport schools and the way it works is
they test kids all around the country so
let's just say it's it's diving and they
identify what are the core skills of a
diver what do you need and then they go
around the country and they test kids
and then they bring a bunch of them to
the Olympic sport schools and then they
you know they get them all involved and
then some kids are the best of those
kids and then the best of those kids and
then you get with these champs that's
why China advanced so so rapidly but
what happens if they're doing that but
it's at the genetic level and there are
countries like Kazakhstan that are
already announcing that they are going
to be screening all of their athletes so
the science isn't there yet so it's
really it's impossible right now to say
I want me to do a genome sequence of
somebody and I know this person has the
potential to be an Olympic sprinter but
ten years from now that's not going to
be the case Wow yeah it's sort of gonna
throw a monkey wrench and the whole idea
of what is fair when it comes to
athletics yeah what is fair what is
human right what is human
yeah I mean look it's not like people
don't already alter their bodies by
training by diet exercise all sorts of
different recovery modality and
cryotherapy song all of it you know high
elevation training all these different
things that they do that manipulates the
human body but it's not like it would be
kind of crazy if you had sports but you
couldn't practice and you couldn't work
out like we want to find out what a
person's really like no practice no
working out that's and that's the thing
is like we are moving it comes back to
we were saying before about nature
mm-hmm it's like we have this this
feeling of nature somehow feels
comfortable to us that's what we're used
to all this stuff that you're talking
about it nobody was doing that ten
thousand years ago it's like I'm running
after a buffalo yeah and so and so as
these boundaries change as the realm of
possibility changes then we're going to
be faced with all of these questions
even now look at a sport like
competitive weightlifting they they have
these like the the real competitive
bodybuilding and you see these guys and
they
they're monsters and then they have
these drug free guys and everybody looks
like a yogi and it's still a pretty face
they like pretty big but not compared to
these other guys the only way to get
those freak levels steroids yeah
and so like how are we going to police
this and I think it's going to be very
difficult and so maybe we can have some
kind of natural area of life but I think
that our our model of what's normal is
just going to change cuz like I was
saying in the beginning we set our
baseline based on how we grew up and and
that it seems about right like it seems
about right to us that everybody gets
immunizations but immunizations are a
form of super power imagine if our
ancestor they couldn't even imagine
immunizations what an unfair advantage
when you have a hundred million people
dying of Spanish flu so we're with this
all this stuff is scary and it's going
to normalize but how it normalizes is is
that's what's it plane it well the world
has changed so much just in the last
twenty years but it feels like this is
just scratching the surface in
comparison to what's coming it was said
people miss understand and they
underestimate the rate of change and the
reason that they do that is since the
beginning of the digital revolution we
have experienced a thing called
exponential changes that you've heard of
Moore's law which is basically computing
power roughly doubles every two years
and we've internalized Moore's law and
that means that every new iPhone we
expect to be better and stronger and
faster and all these kinds of things but
now we're entering in a world where
we're going to have exponential change
across technology platforms and so we
think about well what is exponential
change mean in the context of biology
well at the very very beginning its
genome sequencing is is is going to be
basically basically free but we're going
to be able to change life and because
we're on this J curve like when you
think of what's a 10 year unit of change
looking in the in the rearview mirror
that amount of change is only going to
take five years going forward and then
two years and then one year and so
that's the reason why I've written this
book is I we have to get that this stuff
is coming fast and if we want to be part
of it we have to under
stand it and we have to make our voices
heard what makes you nervous about this
alright three big areas first humans and
all of us incredibly complex I may talk
about genetic code which is
mind-bogglingly complex but our genetics
exists within the incredible incredibly
complex systems biology we have all
these things like our microbiome our
viral more proteome our metabolomic
cysts within the context of our
environment and everything's always
changing and interacting and so we are
messing we have the tools to mess and we
will mess because we're this hubristic
species with these really complex
ecosystems including ourselves we don't
fully understand that's number one - and
you mention it before this issue of
equity what happens if we have every
technology has to have first adopters if
you don't have it you never get the
technology but what happens if a group
of people move much more quickly than
other people whether it's real or not
even if they believe it's real you could
imagine big dangerous societal changes
and the third big area is diversity we
think about diversity we think why it's
great to have diverse workplaces and
schools and and we're more better people
for it and we're more competitive but
diversity is something much much much
deeper in Darwinian terms diversity is
random mutation like that's our core
survival strategy as a species if we
didn't have that you could say we
distilled be single-cell organisms but
we wouldn't we would have died because
the environment would have changed and
we wouldn't have had the the built-in
resilience to add mmhmm yeah that is
really important when you think about
diversity right that we we need a non
uniformity when it comes to our own
biology yeah because need a bunch of
different kinds of people we have to
have it big as even if we optimized for
this world the world will change there's
no good and bad in evolution there's
just well-suited for a particular
environment if that environment changes
the best suited person for your old
environment may be the least suited
person for the new invited seemed real
like really great ideas now like
optimizing health so if you have sickle
cell disease you're probably going to
die and you're going to die young and
it's going to be excruciating people
excruciating pain
and so you would say well let's just get
rid of sickle-cell disease which we can
do but if you are a recessive carrier of
the single of the sickle-cell disease
gene you don't have it you're just
carrying it and you have a pretty
significant risk of passing it on to
your kids but you also have an
additional resistance to malaria and so
we are probably are almost certainly
carrying around all kinds of recessive
traits maybe even ones that we don't
like that are harming us now but it
could be some protection against some
future danger that we don't yet
understand or how or haven't faced and
so the challenge is that diversity has
just happened to us for four billion
years now we're going to have to choose
it and that's a big it's a big challenge
for us so essentially we're going to
have without doubt some unintended
consequences some unintended domino
effect things that are going to take
place that we really can't predict we
just have to kind of go along with this
technology and see where it leads us as
it improves well if you go back and look
at surgeries from the 1950s comparison
to the surgery of 2019 giant leaps I
mean I would never advise someone to get
their knee operated by a 1950s physician
yeah right but that's kind of someone's
gonna have to be an early adopter that
comes these genetic therapies
yeah no sigh I agree with you but where
I would slightly awry would add to what
you're saying is these technologies
they're going to happen they're going to
play out mmm what's it play now is not
whether these technologies are going to
advance they will it will do it they
will advance in a way that is going to
just blow people's minds hmm what's at
play is what are the values that we are
going to weave in to the decision-making
process so we can get a better outcome
than we otherwise would have had and
that that's what in my view that's the
real the important is you know yeah
unintended consequences are something
that I've been taking very seriously
lately when I'm paying attention to
technology as as its used in social
media yeah particularly I one one of the
things has disturbed me quite a bit over
the last few weeks is that there's a
model that
use and not intentionally but there's a
model that they use to get people upset
about things show you things in your
feed that you argue against because that
makes you click on them more and yet
engage in them more and because of the
fact that we have this advertiser based
model where people are trying to get
clicks because they want to get ads on
their page and the more clicks they get
the more money they get from those ads
and so they want to incentivize people
to go there and the best way through the
algorithm with what they've found
without doing it on purpose is to get
people upset yeah and they're pushing
people into these little information
ghettos that are really dangerous
right and we've gotten to this point
where this is just an accepted part of
our lives did you go to check your
Google feed or your Facebook feed and no
but what the fuck are they doing
is this real they're gonna pass this
goddamnit and then get mad and then you
engage with people online and then it
results in more revenue but getting them
to stop that if you had to go to
Facebook and say hey hey Mark Zuckerberg
err no you have fuckin a hundred billion
dollars or whatever you got but you
can't make any more money this way right
because what you're doing is fucking up
society because you're encouraging
dissent you encourage young people to be
upset and arguments and you're doing it
at great financial reward but great
societal cost yeah so stop yeah do it
right well he may not do that comes back
to the point about regulation did the
question is how big is your stick well
one of the guys who was the founder of
yes yes yes is now coming out and saying
my Facebook needs to be broken up and
then he was one of the original founders
and he's like it has gotten so far out
of hand it's so far away from where it
is it's literally affecting global
politics yeah well it is and so one
option is to break it up that it seems
to have worked pretty well with AT&T
another option is to regulate it which
is in my mind would be a better approach
and that is to say here's what's okay
and here's what's not okay and this
stuff is really intricate you have to
really get down beneath these algorithms
which are unbelievably complex but
you're exactly right I mean what we're
seeing now is we are being pushed into
information ghettos but it's like
information barricades and so pushed in
the camps yeah and so amber you are
so dangerous because the old minutes
this country is based on not everybody
agreeing but having a process where
people come and they work it out and
they say you know I'm not perfectly
happy with this outcome but here's a
compromise and if we can't compromise
then our civic culture is gonna break
down and there's so much I mean people
don't see these pillars that are holding
up our society I lived in Cambodia for
two years and if you don't have these
civic pillars under your society
societies look very very different
everyone's life experiences we we kind
of take for granted you can go out the
door walk to Starbucks and and not get
shot or you can you have your house
something half at your house gets robbed
you call the police and the police
aren't the ones who've robbed your house
or they're not in mean there's all these
kinds of crazy things if we break down
the foundations that underpin our lives
that's really dangerous what I was kind
of getting at was that through what this
this process of this algorithm how this
algorithm selects things that it chose
you in your feed and how people are
getting upset by this and how this is
generating massive amounts of revenue
once it's already happened it's very
difficult to stop and my concern would
be that this would be a similar thing
when it comes to genetic engineering
we're saying we need to be able to put
regulations on this we needed to be able
to establish but once it gets out of the
bag once it gets rolling and I have you
remember when Mark Zuckerberg sat in
front of all those politicians they had
no fucking idea what they were talking
about you make money and such piss-poor
prepares and it just it shows you like
these are the people that are looking
out for us good fucking luck these are
Luddites they're dumbasses they're fools
right and they're they don't know
anything about some are smarter and
worse but yeah almost everyone was
underwhelming and under impressive in
that hearing in that hearing yeah the
fact that they're dealing with one of
the most important moments of our time
but they didn't bring on some sort of a
like legitimate technology expert it
could explain it hit falls yes and do
some in a way that the rest of world's
can you know so they're not going to
protect us from genetic engineering
either right cuz they're not they're
trained generalists yeah but in terms of
their education for the most part and
they're not they're not concerned this
is not they're concerned with raising
money for their campaign the concern was
getting real act
that's their concern with yeah I totally
agree with you that if we wait to focus
on this issue until it becomes a crisis
it's going to be too late because all
the big decisions will have been made
the reason why I wrote this book the
reason why you know I'm on my almost
week three of this book tour doing
events like this every day is what I am
saying in every form that I can is this
is really important you kind of we were
watching the news yesterday they had
this royal baby in the UK like I don't
give a shit it doesn't affect my life in
any but what is it play now is the
future of our entire species and our
democracy in our lives and we have to be
focusing on those things because we have
a moment now where we can get to a
certain extent influence how these
revolutions play out and if we just wait
around if we're distracted and we're
focusing on all this stuff that's
sucking up our attention and whether
it's Trump or brexit or Muller and all
these things I mean we're spent how much
of our time are we spending focus on
this fine let's pay a little bit of
attention but there's really big stuff
50 years from now 100 years oh no one's
gonna look back and now so that was the
age of Trump that was know they're gonna
say that was the age when after almost
four billion years of evolution humans
took control of their own evolutionary
process and it's huge and it's gonna
change all of life and what I'm trying
to do is to say everybody has to have a
seat at the table whether you're a
conservative Christian whether you're a
biohacking transhumanist everybody needs
to be at the the table because we're
talking about is the future of our
species we're talking about the future
of our species but are we even capable
of understanding the consequences of
these actions the stuff that we're
discussing like right now right I'm not
like I'm talking about it right I mean
if someone said hey you've got to go
speak in front of people about the
consequences right and in a very clear
yeah one-hour presentation I'd be like
no I'm not well know what I'm talking
about
one we can go together so you're good
thank you but to the reason why I've
written this book hacking Darwin is I
wanted to say if you could read just one
book and it's written just for everybody
in a very clear way with a lot of jokes
that I think are funny my mother laughed
at them as well that you get it
and then once you know just the basics
as a human being anybody it has an equal
right to be part of this of this
conversation as the top scientist or the
the leaders of any of any countries I
would agree with you there but I don't
think that other people are going to see
it that way
I think the people that are in control
they're not gonna say hey we need to
find we need to be fair with everyone
all the citizens the world how do you
feel we should proceed no but that's why
we have to that's why we need this
bottom-up groundswell but we can't have
a bottom-up groundswell if people if
just general people aren't even aware of
what the issues are and that's and
that's the challenge and that's why
forums like yours are just so important
I mean you have all of these people and
then you maybe everyone doesn't listen
to this podcast say all right I get it I
can go give that hour-long speech but
you can read a couple books and then you
can give an an hour speech because the
issues like yes there are scientific
issues but this isn't a conversation
about science this is about values and
ethics in our future and it has to be a
conversation for everybody yeah it's not
just a scientific conversation it's a
conversation about the future of this
species and yeah the species will be um
and that's something we're wholly
unqualified no it's but here's here's a
little vote for optimism okay we have
never been this literate as a species
we've never been this educated I don't
think we've ever been this nice either
well I hope so I really did well when
you look at all the wars and all the
murder that used to happen it's actually
oh this is the best time ever to be
alive still sucks for people that are in
bad situations you know but yes on
average is better and we've never been
this connected so we have so I climb in
the book I call for a species wide
dialogue on the future of human genetic
engineering you think oh that's nuts
seven billion people on earth how are
they gonna how are they gonna do that
but we have the opportunity and we have
to try because you don't want luck with
the beginning of the genetically
modified crops era the scientists were
actually really responsible but regular
people weren't consulted and they felt
these guys just did it to me mm-hmm so
if you have all the marchers with
genetically modified organisms you we
are entering the era of genetically
modified humans and that's going to
scare the shit out of people and so we
need to start preparing and we need to
make people feel their respect
and included and our government leaders
aren't going to do it for us so we have
to find ways of engaging ourselves and
that's why with me with the book I set
up a website where people can can share
their views debate with other people I
really want everybody to be part of this
conversation how do you think it's gonna
play out in terms of how people various
religions perceive this yeah so there's
a real variation so there are people on
one end of the spectrum who believe that
this is quote unquote playing God and if
you believe that the world was created
exactly as it is
by some kind of divine force and that
it's wrong for humans to change to quote
unquote play God it's hard to explain
how you could justify everything that
we've done it and we've changed the face
of this of life on this planet Earth but
I really respect people who say look I
think that there's a line that you know
that I believe that life begins at
conception and that any kind of
manipulation after conception is
interfering that's going too far and I
respect that and those people need to
have a seat at the table and that's and
there's certainly very strong religious
views in Judaism there's an idea called
tikkun olam which means that the world
is created cracked and broken and it's
the responsibility of each person to try
to fix it and that's a justification for
using science and doing things to try to
make the world a better place and then
there are now these new kind of I mean
transhumanism it's almost like a
religion it's this religion of science
and so we're going to have we're humans
we're so diverse we are going to have
this level of diversity and the
challenge is how do we make how do we
have a process that brings brings
everybody in but it's it's tough so when
we're talking about genetic any sort of
genetic manipulation we're basically
talking about doing stuff to the wet
we're doing stuff to the biology right
what do you think about symbiotic
interactions and Technology because I
think one of the things that I'm
concerned with more than anything is
this sort of inevitable path of
Technology getting into our bodies
whether it's through nano by
significant ation we were talking
yesterday about chips right like what
would they have to do to get you to get
it put a chip in your body like what and
what kind of powers would it have to
have before you accepted it yeah well
people already doing it in Sweden and so
are they doing in Sweden yeah they're
just they're putting this little chips
in their hands and they're and under
their skin and they're using it to open
doors and access things so it's just
starting so I definitely believe you
know right now you look at we look at
photographs of our parents and you say
God look at your hair your clothes
that's crazy definitely I think that you
know 20 years from now 30 years now
people are gonna look at pictures of us
and say what's that little rectangular
thing and you're gonna say that was a
phone what and they'll say watch it's
like yeah we used to carry it around in
our pocket and like Michael Douglas when
you watch him in that movie Wall Street
he's got that giant exactly so we are
the earth we are all we are all Michael
Douglas because our technology your
absolute right is not going to be
something that we carry around it's
technology is coming inside of our
bodies that is the future of where it's
going and you know people say well are
you what what is human genetic
engineering have to do when we know that
AI is going to get more and more
powerful but the future of technology
future of all of this it's not human or
AI it's human plus AI and that is what's
going to drive our we are Co evolving
with our technology and that's what's
going to drive our drive us forward but
you're exactly right to be afraid and to
be concerned and again everything huh so
how are we going to regulate it what are
we going to have guardrails of how far
is too far are we going to let companies
just do whatever they want or we're
going to put restrictions on what they
can do I think letting the whole world
decide though you're gonna run into
those religious roadblocks if for sure
and that's and that's the challenge is
that the science is advancing
exponentially whatever we do and so we
have to have our understanding of the
science needs to at least try to keep
pace the regulations need to keep up I'm
part of the World Health Organization
International Advisory Committee on
human genome editing so we're meeting
six times this year in Geneva and the
question that we're asking is how do we
think about global regulation Atlee
to try to put limits on the far ends of
what's possible and it's it's really
really difficult but that's why we need
to have this kind of process and it
seems impossibly ambitious but every
crazy idea has to begin somewhere so
you're doing every couple months yeah
yes Wow yeah because they did want to be
on top of it as things change well
that's the goal it's just it's so hard
because almost impossible it's
impossible it's impossible and that's
why even the World Health Organization
which is the lead Health Organization of
the United Nations it's not enough
the task is so much bigger and that's
why we need to have this kind of grant
bottom-up groundswell that I'm pushing
for and you're absolutely right what you
said before like because there's not a
crisis people are focusing on other
things open any news site like what do
you see it's not like the really
important stuff it's you know Trump did
this or Kardashian's did that and like
we're in this culture where there are a
lot of draws on our attention but
sometimes there's really important stuff
and people are afraid of it people are
afraid of science people feel like I
remember science from high school I
didn't like it I was uncomfortable um
you know this is this is for technical
people and I just feel like we can't
science is so deeply transforming the
world not just around us but within us
and so we have to understand it and then
people who are explaining science like
me the onus is on us like if somebody
reads my book and says well that was
really dense that was too hard
like that's my failure like I was giving
a talk in New York a couple of a couple
of weeks ago and so I gave my my talk
and I try to make this really accessible
for people people are all jazzed up they
got it and then there was this wonderful
guys brilliant senior scientist at this
MIT this major
stem cell research center and so the
host said all right Jamie just talked
can you sign can you give us a little
background on the science this guy knows
so much and he started going it was very
technical and you could just like it to
see the faces of the people in the
audience it was like oh god what's
happening here and it's like their level
of excitement it's just shrunk because
it couldn't really put it all
yeah and so and scientists scientists
aren't trained by and large to
communicate and to see in the future is
so a little more than a month ago I was
in Kyoto and in Japan and I went to the
laboratory of the world's leading
scientists who's doing a process of what
I've mentioned earlier of turning adult
cells into stem cells into eggs and so
this this will revolutionize the way
humans reproduce and so I had was in a
meeting and with his top postdocs suits
so these are like really the cutting
edge of these technologies and I went
around to each of them and I said here's
my question have two questions for each
of you one tell me what you're doing now
and - tell me what are the implications
of what you're doing now for 50 years
from now and for the first question
because oh I'm doing this and we're
doing this with mouse models and people
were so animated and then 50 years but
now people just froze and it was so
uncomfortable just because that's not
what scientists do they are trained to
say well this is the thing just in front
of me so Ron I thought I was writing
this book for the general public but I'm
being invited to speak to thousands of
doctors and scientists because what
they're saying is we get that we're
doing this little piece of this and
whether it's lab research or fertility
doctors or all sorts of things but it's
really hard to put together the whole
story of the genetics revolution and
what it means for us and for society
yeah that is interesting about
scientists right they're just
concentrate on the task at hand yeah I
mean it wasn't that that was like one of
the big concerns about the Manhattan
Project right this is the task the task
is how do you out how to do it so they
figure out how to do it not the eventual
yes so when robert Oppenheimer who was
the the lead of the Manhattan Project
when that first bomb went off I mean he
has his his famous quote yeah exactly I
mean the English common translation was
holy shit what have we done yeah and and
that's and this science is real but it's
not going to be it's not one person
doing it I mean that's the whole like
science has been diffused at least with
with nuclear power it was a relatively
small number of people and it
was a one or two states that could do it
now with with precision gene editing I
mean you get the Nobel Prize for for
figuring out how to do you will get the
Nobel Prize for figuring out how to do
CRISPR gene edits but to apply it once
the formula already exists you get like
an a-minus in your high school biology
class so this technology is out there
it's cheap its accessible did you go to
that 2045 conference in Manhattan a
couple years back now do you know about
all that
20:44 that's that's part of the thing
with these transhumanists folks they
believe that with their own calculations
of the exponential in technology that's
somewhere around 2040 a singularity yeah
yeah yeah at the very least we're gonna
reach this point where you're gonna be
able to either download consciousness or
have some sort of an artificially
intelligent sentient writing it's
hanging out with you yeah so so I'm
involved I'm on faculty for one of the
programs of singularity University
called exponential medicine and so we're
thinking a lot about that actually had
an editor on the New York Times a few
weeks ago imagining a visit to a
fertility clinic in the year 2045 and
again because we were on this
exponential change it's really hard for
people to to internalize to kind of feel
how fast these changes are coming I do
think though Ray Kurzweil who's a really
incredible genius he thinks that we are
soon going to get to a point now where
our artificial intelligence is self
learning because when you think about it
AI if it gets to the point where it can
read something read and comprehend like
in seconds it will read every book ever
written in human history and then it's
just you have all these doublings and
all this more knowledge you can imagine
how that would happen pretty quickly
the counter-argument against and I think
that it will but I don't think that
where that our human brains are on one
hand they're incredibly complex and
they're also kind of irrational I mean
we have all these different layers you
have our lizard brain and every decision
that we make there's the rational
decision but then there's all the other
stuff that our brains that doesn't even
rise to the level of our awareness that
our
that our brains are processing and right
now we don't really have one really
effective artificial intelligence
algorithm which is for pattern
recognition but you think if you think
of pattern recognition as a core skill
of what our brains do our brains
probably have a thousand 2000 different
skills but the core thing is whether we
reach this singularity moment or not
these technologies are going to become
incredibly more powerful they're going
to become increasingly integrated into
our lives and into our beings and part
of our evolutionary process there's no
longer oh we just have our biological
evolution and our technological
evolution and those are separate things
they're connected it's going to be that
weird question of whether or not if an
artificial intelligence is going to be
able to absorb all the writing that
human beings have ever done and really
understand us yeah
will they really still be able to
understand us just because they get all
the writing so right now
you would say no I would say no yeah but
20 years from now 50 years or 100 years
from now they could come up with a
reasonable facsimile I mean yeah they
could figure out a way to get it close
enough yeah I know where it's like her
like that yeah yeah that's it it's an
essential point because I think when
people imagine this AI future they're
imagining like some intimate
relationship with some artificial
intelligent intelligent that feels just
like a human I don't think that's going
to happen because it's it don't
well no but just because AI it will be
its own form of intelligence and it may
not be frankly you wouldn't want a eyes
with these brains like we have that have
all these different impulses that are
kind of imagining all this this crazy
stuff we're we may want them to be more
rational than we are so like you
chimpanzees or our close relatives they
don't think just like us we're not you
know we're not expecting them to think
like they're their own thing and I think
a eyes will be their own things will we
be interacting with them will we be
having sex with them yes but if they are
there it's not going to be that they're
just like us we're going to they're
going to be these things that live
within us live with us and together
we're going to evolve well they're
certainly already better at doing
certain things like playing chess yeah
it took a long time for an artificial
intelligence to be able to compete
against a real chess match open
they swamped them yeah so say learn
quickly like incredibly quickly they
teach themselves yeah so so first we had
chess and chess people said oh that's
what it means to be a human the
computers will never beat humans at just
now it's like everyone says well no
human could ever compete and then they
said well there's this Chinese game of
Go which kind of when people here look
at it looks kind of like checkers but
it's actually way more sophisticated way
more complicated than chess I heard that
there are more moves and go more
potential moves and there are stars in
the US yes so so then they had alphago
that this with this company deep mind
which the was later acquired by google
they built this algorithm that in 2016
defeated the world champions of go
people thought that was we were decades
away and then deepmind created this new
program called alpha 0 and alpha 0 with
alphago they gave it access to all of
the digitized games of go so it very
quickly was able to learn from how
everybody else had played go alpha zero
they just said here are the basic rules
of go and they let alpha go just play
against itself with no other experience
other than here are the rules and play
against in in four days alpha zero
destroyed alphago and then alpha and net
alpha zero destroyed the world champions
of chess and destroyed every other
computer program that had ever played
chess and this again those computer
programs had internalized all the chess
games of grandmasters alpha zero had not
internalized any it just played against
itself for a few days and then shogi
which is a Japanese traditional game
kind of like chess it destroyed the
grandmasters of that so that's what I'm
saying is that these the world is
changing its changing so much faster
than we anticipate and we have to be as
ready for that as we can I think we need
to come to grips the fact that we're way
stupider than we think who are we what
we think we're really intelligent and we
are in comparison to everything else on
this planet yeah but in comparison to
what is possible we are really fucking
dumb in comparison to what this computer
can do and what
the future of that computers and what
maybe that computers gonna read is on
another computer yeah this is good but
I've got some I got some hiccups here
yeah no it's true and yet the technology
is us right like this these not like
this technology some alien force we've
it's like this it's like we create art
we collect we could yeah you use that
you mentioned cities and our like we
create these cities which are these
incredible places where dreams can
happen 'no city is like here in Los
Angeles or New York where where we're on
from so this technology is us and the
challenge is how can we make sure that
this technology serves our needs rather
than undermines our needs yeah and
whether or not our needs supersede the
needs of the human race or supersedes
the needs of the planet yeah it's we're
almost too much chimp right to
contemplate these yeah critical
decisions in terms of like what how it's
going to unfold from here on out yeah we
really might not we but the people that
are actually at the tip of the spear of
this stuff they really might be
affecting the way the planet is shaped
answers from now and we're doing that
now I mean we are there is an article
came out the other day there's a million
species that are on the verge of
extinction we are deriving all these
other species to extinction we're
warming the the planet so this is humans
are the the determining factor in many
ways for how this planet plays out and
that's why in my mind everything comes
back to vows we you're right we have
this this lizard nature this this monkey
nature it's it's who we are and that's I
mean you wouldn't want to take that away
because that's the core of what we are
and yet we're also a species that has
created philosophy we've created
beautiful religions and traditions and
art and the question is which version of
us is going to lead us into the future
if it's this you know tribal primate
with these urges like that's really
frightening if we can say we've done
better and worse in history we had this
terrible second world war and yet at the
end of the second world war with
American leadership the world came
together we established a United Nations
we established these concepts of human
rights like you can't just kill
everybody
in your own country and say hey it's
it's just my business so we have this
capability but it's always a struggle I
mean these forces are always at war with
each other in many ways it's just too
much to think about yeah we have to I
know we do have to I'm one of the things
that's always been amusing to me is that
we seem to have this insatiable desire
to improve things yeah and I've always
wondered why like but but is that maybe
because this is what human beings are
here for yeah it's what we do
yes who we are right yeah but is this a
product it's just us being intelligent
trying to survive against nature and
predators and weather and all the all
the different issues that we came up
that we evolved growing up and dealing
with and then now we just want things to
be better
we just want things to be more
convenient faster but more data you're
aware of Elon Musk's neural link check
technology yeah how much do you know
about it I know a decent amount and my
friend Brian Johnson he has a company
Colonel there's a few different
companies that are trying to think about
these brain machine interfaces and what
are they trying to do basically what
they're trying to do is to find a way to
connect our brains to our machines and
there's a little bit of progress and our
brains are they're incredibly
complicated and they're messy I mean if
they're there's a lot that's that that's
happening but we are increasingly
figuring out how to connect our brains
to our technology and so people are
imagining a time when we can do things
like download download memories download
ideas or upload memories and upload data
isn't there's some very early science
that is suggesting that this will be
possible but it's it's still the very
early days the very early days but Elon
was giving the impression that sometime
this year they're gonna release
something you know they may release
something but it's not going to be
something that's going to change the
world because this that technology is
way more nascent than even the genetics
technology that I'm that I've been
talking about so it's not like that
there's that that it's at all remotely
possible that this year you're going to
be able to like up
a full memory or download a full memory
but there are little things that are
happening but every every journey begins
with a step but the technology is fairly
transparent its turn in terms of like
where the state of the art is right now
it is in that it's extremely early this
stuff is so when you think of like about
systems that we understand I mentioned
that we you know we understand just a
little bit about genomics we know less
about the brain the brain is kind of the
great unknown of this universe we know
more about the oceans than we know about
our brain I mean is we know very very
little we understand that if you kind of
stick an electric current in somebody's
brain like that's gonna have you if you
kind of shoot a spike through somebody's
head but really understanding how the
brain functions if we're still in the
very very early days so do you think
that Kurzweil is off with this idea that
you're gonna be able to download your
consciousness into a computer because
that's one of the most controversial
ideas that he's come up with so I think
he's I think he's off based on your use
of the word your so I mentioned that a
month ago I was in Kyoto and I was at
this at the stem cell lab but I also
went to another lab of a guy named
Hiroshi Ishiguro who's the world's
leading humanoid robot assist and so
he's the guy he was on the cover of
Wired and he's created these robot
avatars and like I had a conversation
with this this robot woman Erica and it
was really interesting cuz I could see
that like if I would smile she'd smile
and lean forward and if I had like a you
know over exaggerated sad face
she'd like change her expression and she
can have like you know basic basic
conversations but we're still a long way
and so from from having full robots but
I had this for about human interactions
but I had this this debate with ishiguro
and he was saying that he thought that
the future of humanity was
non-biological that we were going to
kind of unload ourselves to these non
biological entities and that is how we
would gain our immortality and I admire
I argued something very different I feel
like we are biological beings I think
we'll fully integrate with our
technology but if we ever become
entirely non-biological then that's not
us
either we will have committed suicide as
a species or these robots or that will
have killed us because even if let's
just say that I could download my entire
consciousness to some kind of robot and
let's just say that was possible that
robot would be me for that first exact
moment when the transfer happened but
then beyond that they wouldn't be me
anymore because there would be a whole
other set of experience but we're but
certainly our interaction or
connectivity with this tech is going to
be greater and so even if Kurzweil isn't
exactly right
he's directionally right yeah the
problem would be that you would be
locked in if they downloaded your
consciousness into some sort of a Bank
of computer somewhere right where are
you if that's your consciousness your
consciousness in these ones and zeros
yeah you're we I mean that's terrifying
you know it's terrifying some didn't
like you and they said I'm gonna make
one version of you suffer for all
eternity yeah yeah you download you
while you sleep it's true but I have
something worse than that
okay death and so I think that nobody is
gonna say well I'm gonna be Joe living a
life or I'm gonna like not be Joe and
I'll just have my consciousness download
at someplace else and so if the
comparison is well I've lived this life
and I don't want to die and so I'd
rather kind of be here in some kind of
version and even if it's not me this is
something really I think some people
will want that not even some people will
but they don't know what they're getting
right yes in terms of you don't know
what that experience is gonna be like
nor do you know if there is some sort of
a chemical gateway that happens in the
mind when you do expire and allows you
to pass through to the other dimension
that yeah your consciousness and your
soul longs to travel to but no you I
hope you're right about that am i I'm
definitely not like I've read about this
in my novel it's like yeah but I think
kind of when you're dead you're just
dead unit though well just because I
think that you this kind of immortality
comes because time stops time is this
relative concept and so at the moment
that you die that's immortality for you
because time stops flowing for you time
is that's
scientists time is this relative concept
other people very legitimately there's
no way to prove it feel that we have
this soul and this soul can travel to
other other dimensions I happen to
believe that we are biological beings
and our experience of the soul whatever
is connected to our biology when our
biology stops functioning those
experiences whatever they are stopped
being accessible at least to us have you
had any psychedelic experiences yeah I
haven't and I was so mmm attempt I we
started the interview talking about my
chocolate shamanism you ever done
anything I haven't in but I was realize
I want to I don't think so and I'll tell
you why so I listened to the Michael
Palin interviews and he had his great
conversation with Sam Harris and I
really think that this psilocybin stuff
is is real and just got decriminalize
ever I was just there the other day but
as I said before I think that the
ultimate drug is us and so for me I
would rather and I definitely think that
our awareness that doesn't encompass
everything that is knowable everything
that we that we could know but we hem
ourselves in and if we want to get out
of those limitations certainly drugs are
ways that have people have used for for
many thousands of years but when you
take the drug you're like taking the
drug and you're not taking the drug like
I would rather what does that mean it's
like if you're taking psilocybin you're
having this great experience but then
tomorrow you're not taking psilocybin
and so kind of your consciousness has
narrow my aspiration would be to
recognize that the drug is us then we
want to expand our consciousness there
are all kinds of ways whether it's
meditation or awareness or just you know
simple appreciation that's when I do
these cacao ceremonies what I say is
like you have this cacao in front of you
but it's not just this like think of the
person in Honduras who planted the seed
the person who watered that see the
person who took the plant the person who
paved the road to bring the plant and I
just I just think that we can expand our
consciousness through our own means we
always have access I hear what you're
saying but you're saying this from a
person that's never has
experience it's generally preposterous
if you did experience what psilocybin
can do to you yeah you definitely
wouldn't be saying it this way you also
wouldn't be thinking then you take it
and then you're not on it anymore
because it's profoundly influential for
the your perspective in regards to the
whole rest of your existence there's
many people that have had psychedelic
experiences that think about it as a
rebirth yeah that they've gone through
this and changed yeah so but why would
you have this rigid thought process
about drugs and not drugs yeah but yet
you don't have it about cow which is a
mild drug yeah and so I you're right
that it may not be entirely consistent
some of the people you've described are
good friends of mine who've really done
it and I've really I've talked to them
about it and I'm humming endlessly
curious so why don't you do it the
reason is so far I have been on this
journey to see what's possible within
myself and I'm still on that journey I'm
not I don't to close off any possibility
for I assume that it would close things
off that's what's confusing yeah it's
just opening you up to a new experience
that other people have found to be
profoundly influential yeah yeah so so
far you're very resistant to this like
yeah I'm talking you yeah yeah you can't
wait to come your own rational your
right back from that perspective of a
person who hasn't experienced any of
them you're so right and just that vague
is it such a great point because I'm
very close with actually that with the
Tibetans
one of my closest friends is the Prime
Minister of the Tibetan exile government
so I've been many times to John Salah in
India I've met with His Holiness the
Dalai Lama many times and the most
incredible thing about meeting with
these guys and they they are all people
who found these incredible states of
heightened consciousness so much that
their brains are changed when they go
into the the fMRI machines but when you
have a conversation with them it's not
like what we do like exactly and thank
you for calling me out like you say
something
I've already in my head countered what
you're saying before you're finished
saying and not why you kept saying
exactly yes I which means you made me
uncut a little uncomfortable it is good
that's what we want and these guys it's
like you talked
and they would just be so tuned in to
what you were saying and they would just
kind of think about then you'd finish
and then they'd kind of look up and then
because we're Americans we want you know
somebody stops speaking like you have to
if you don't speak right away and then
they would like a minute and then it's
like you're kind of looking around was
it me I say so and then they would come
back with this incredibly thoughtful
thing so I you're right you know I don't
want to close off any possibility there
are many different things that we could
could do the path that I have been on
and certainly with this cacao and you
write cacao is like a mild I mean not a
huge one but like a mild dragon life is
a mild drug so Simon's not very mild
yeah knowing my friends who have done it
have said exactly what he said they say
I have a good friend of mine who who did
it and then he said it just it showed me
a path to a different identity a
different consciousness and now he said
I don't do psilocybin but I do daily
meditation but I can see where I'd like
to go what's possible so I get there
yeah yeah there's a bunch of different
substances out there that have very
similar profound effects there's a real
thought and this is something that
Terence Mckenna described way back in
the late 90s early 2000s he believed
that you're going to be able to recreate
a lot of psychedelic States through
virtual reality so that people that
don't want to actually do a drug will be
able to experience what it's like to be
on that drug and that I mean that's it's
very theoretical and hypothetical and
yes you know who knows whether or not
that's possible but that that could be
one other way that human beings
interface with technology so humans in
my view are far more hackable than we
think
mmm that that there are so many that we
just imagine our biology as being fixed
but our biology is really variable like
I have a friend who's an
anesthesiologist at Stanford and she's
done this experimentation of just
running just like very mild electric
currents through people's brains and
people have these very real experiences
and whether it's arousal or something
that it's that you're you're entering
people's minds through different ways so
you talk about that virtual reality we
are entering a world where the
pixelation of virtual reality will be
equal to life hmm
and that so you're going to be in this
VR space and it says it will look it may
smell it could Eve with haptic suits it
may feel just like life yeah and our
brains I don't know if you've done these
things with these these VR glasses where
you go and you you you can see people
you're just like in a in a hall and you
put on the glasses and now you're in an
elevator going to the top now on the
outside like a window cleaners elevator
to the top of this high-rise and there's
a little rickety board and then there's
this cat at the end of the board and
they're saying yeah you have to go go
save the cat and you've already seen
that you're just in a hall you know it
in your brain there's this cat
everybody's looking at you and you've
seen all these other people panic in
fact when I'm there I'm gonna be so I'm
gonna go grab that cat and you're
terrified like you're trying to override
your lizard brain and your lizard brain
saying like no don't step just have that
for our HTC vive yeah yeah we need to
set that up Jim we need yeah a
two-by-four yeah put on the ground it's
incredible and so I think that this
whole concept of reality is that art our
technology is going to be changing our
sense of reality and then what's real
like if you feel arousal in your brain
because of an electric current or you
feel it because you're with your
girlfriend or wife or reading a magazine
or whatever is that different is one
real and one not real and I think that
this there's real big issues here
jamming that is the matrix right yeah I
mean the idea that and if it feels
better and it's more enjoyable than real
life what is gonna stop people from
doing the Ray Kurzweil deal and
downloading yourself into this this
dimension well not much you know whether
it's possible to do a full download or
not for me I think that's an open
but whether people are going to be more
comfortable living in these alternative
worlds mhm and whether we're going to be
able to say oh no that is the fake world
like if you're in this virtual world
right but you're do you have friends in
that world you're interacting in that
world you have experiences to feel every
bit as real in that world as in our
world and people say oh no that's not
real those those aren't your friends
like even now like you know we all
people with global lives you kind of
have these friends like I have a good
friend in Mongolia we talk all the time
do you ever see them in person once in a
while like once every year or two it's
great to see them that's a real person
though no it's a real that's someone
like you actually do know but if it was
someone that you only talk to online and
they lived on Joey that's where things
get weird it's true but let's just say
I've been following that hypothetical
you have that person they're part of
your whole life mm-hmm and you're there
with you they're they with you through
your life experiences you call them up
when you're sad like is it so essential
that you've met that person physically
like is that the core of what it means
to be someone's friend that you it's not
essential but it means a lot it does and
I and so I mean because we are not like
we are these physical beings and we are
these virtual beings but figuring out
what's the balance is gonna be really
tricky yeah what is the balance like
what I'm worried about
augmented reality too cuz I you know
when you see people that use snapchat
filters and give themselves dog ears and
stuff like that like yeah how long
before that is just something that
people choose to turn on or turn off
about life itself
yeah like you'll be able to see the
world through different lenses this time
could be a different color the plants
could be a different color yeah
am i right about this in one of my
novels eternal sonata where I think
we're just going to have these contact
lenses and I'm and it'll be different
kinds of information based on what
people want I mean like I'll meet with
you and it'll say alright this is Joe
here's a little bit of background and
whatever and we'll have useful
information or you're walking around a
city and you'll be get little alerts of
things you might do or
history it's I think that that's what
they were thinking about with Google
glasses yeah well I know but he just was
so annoying to people he killed
he's too weird yeah yeah yeah yeah it's
just to everybody felt like they were
getting filmed do they were yeah I mean
they were when you're walking around
with Google glasses on you assumed that
people were recording everything was
very strange they were but I think
that's another thing that we're just all
of our lives are going to be recorded of
course
now do you think that that's gonna come
in the form of a contact lens or do you
think it's gonna come in the form of
like ski goggles that you're gonna put
on nobody wants to look like an idiot
and so in the beginning true
nobody in the beginning all these you
talked about Michael Douglas with this
or like that my favorite one is is Kurt
Russell in Escape from New York
what do you have there yeah it's like
it's like this really cool tech like he
it finally gets out of this Manhattan
hell and he's got this phone and it's
like this big and it's a cell phone this
it's like very very early days and so
you know now we have these kind of
glasses and there's like a little bit of
a little bit of cash a mom has a
cellphone that's that big I mean that no
house at the Verizon store yeah I think
it's like an attachment earnest an
accessory to a phone yeah it's like you
can bring it with you nice intervention
why not bring your other phone that's
the idea behind it yeah so if you could
just sign well I'm going out let me just
bring my tiny phone for essentials it's
all this tiny I mean the phones are
gonna get quote-unquote phones are just
gonna get so smart so I say they're
gonna come inside of us you'll have like
a little contact lens maybe a little
thingy or maybe a little permanent
implant in your behind your tooth or one
of your teeth they'll replace a tooth
with a computer yeah well you know pipe
it right into your nerves any kind of
crazy stuff you think about it's
probably gonna happen some of it some of
it will take some of it won't right yeah
right yeah it seems like that's what
we're gonna have to say like how it
plays out and that's one of the things
when you're talking about scientists
that are working on these things they're
working on what's right in front of them
they're not looking at the greater
landscape itself in terms of like what
the future holds
it's not their job and that's why we
need other people I certainly see myself
are those people you and who else who
would you elect if Trump came to you and
said Jaime we've got problems we need to
figure out the future what you do so
well certainly and we need to have a mix
of different kinds of people and so I
certainly people like me who were kind
of big picture futurists we need that we
need scientists I work with some really
incredible sign I did an event at
Harvard last week with George church
who's kind of like the living Charles
Darwin David Sinclair who you know has
been on this program is a friend of me
working on life extension and we need
people just from all backgrounds and so
like I would say like we need people we
need poor people we need people from
developing world we need all kinds of
people but in terms of the people who
are kind of articulating the big picture
of the world and what are the challenges
that we're facing I certainly put myself
in that category people like you've all
know a Harare it was just kind of big
also kind of big thinkers people like
Sid Mukherjee and I just think we have
to articulate the big picture and we
have to do it in a way so that people
can see themselves in this story and
then and then enter into the
conversation are you writing this book
just to sort of educate people and let
them understand exactly what is going on
and that it is a really volatile and
chaotic and amazing time and that all
these things are you are you doing this
book to but what are what essentially
was hacking Darwin like what was the
motivation behind it was it for a person
like me or was it for the everyone like
it's for for everyone and so that what I
really wanted to so the background is
gonna give I can give you just a little
bit of Zorah
so more than 20 years ago I was working
on the National Security Council and my
then boss Richard Clarke who was then
this obscure White House official who
was jumping up and down saying we need
to be focusing on terrorism and al Qaeda
and bin Laden and he was trying to tell
everybody and nobody was paying
attention to he was totally marginalized
and when 9/11 happened Dix memo was on
George Bush's desk saying exactly that
we need to focus on al Qaeda here's
what's going to happen you and Dick even
before then would always tell me that if
everyone in Washington was focusing on
one thing you could be sure there was
something much more important that was
being missed and so more than 20 years
ago I was looking around I saw these
little pieces of disparate information
and I came to the conclusion
the genetics revolution was going to
change everything so I educated myself I
started writing articles I was invited
to testify before Congress and then to
try to get that story out I was I
started I wrote my my two most recent
near-term sci-fi novels Genesis Code and
eternal sonata and when I was on book
tours for those and I explained the
science to people the way I kind of a
self educated citizen scientist and a
novelist would explain the science all
of a sudden people got it and that was
when I realized I needed to write the
book about the genetics revolution that
people could absorb that wouldn't scare
people but my mission for the book is
that this stuff as we've talked about
it's so important that everybody needs
to be part of the conversation we have
this brief window and what I'm calling
for is this species wide dialogue on the
future of human genetic in genetic
engineering and I have a whole game plan
in the book about what people can do how
they can get involved people
individually on a national level we have
to put a lot of pressure on our elected
leaders and say stop focusing on the
crap there is really important stuff
that needs to be addressed and we need
leadership I'm going I'm speaking on in
in Congress a week and a half from now
talking about about these issues so we
need to have venom on an international
level we have to have some kind of
international system we're so far away
from being able to do that we don't even
know what the standards are but we have
to be pushing and so it I know you think
of it in terms of like the same way we
have with like nuclear weapons yeah in a
way in many ways yeah but the thing is
with nuclear weapons a lot of that
happened at the state level at the
country level this needs to happen at a
popular level and at a at a government
level so the only way that that's going
to happen effectively is we need a real
comprehensive education on the subject
it's not that people can just guess
right how do you know what's the
consequences what where we're at right
now yeah right
yeah and that's and that's like Sanjay
Gupta had a wonderful quote that's
actually on the cover of my book which
is if you can read one book on the
future of our species this is it so what
I've tried to do is to say like if you
just want to go to one place to
understand what's happening what's at
stake what it means for you and what you
can do now if you want to get
involved I've tried to do that but then
ironically I'm now like as I mentioned
being asked to speak to thousands of
doctors and scientists because they're
all reading this book and they're saying
this is this is positioning my work in
in a much bigger context Sanjay Gupta is
a very interesting cat because he was
very anti marijuana and then he started
doing research on it and then totally
flipped 180 degrees yeah which to me is
a great sign of both humility and
intelligence I recognize that the data
was different in his presupposition yes
yeah he had these prejudices that were
very common yeah yeah now when you speak
to Congress yeah what do you do they
briefed you in terms of like what they
would like specifically for you to
address No so this one it's I've been
asked to go and speak and a lot of
members of Congress who are going to be
invited and what I'm going to tell them
is look this is really important our
Congress is not doing enough and here
are the things that we need to do and
what are you gonna say to try to really
get it into their head what I'm gonna
say is that the genetics revolution is
here if we don't have a system if you
don't have a rational system to manage
it if we don't have a system you talked
about public education the challenge
that we face in the United States is we
traditionally have had a representative
democracy and now we're transitioning
from a representative democracy to a
popular democracy so Switzerland has a
popular democracy but they have like
really well-educated people who are able
who have enough information to make
smart decisions
we haven't educated our public and yet
the public is making big decisions and a
lot of it is happening just on a gut
feeling that's what's happening with
trade agreements where people is have I
have a feeling it's bad without you know
the ability to really get into the into
the details and so we are having that
transition which means there's a lot of
responsibility on us to educate our
public and it's just it's a tragedy we
treat people in this country like you
can just throw people away like you so
many if you're in some crappy school
system and you know your your your
chances of success are so minimized not
because if anything that you've done
just because of your circumstance then
it's unacceptable
it is only so I mean the equal
opportunity is what we really should all
strive for us and
I think some people conflate that with
op equal success right and you're not
going to get the same equality of
outcome you're gonna get different
different amounts of effort and
different people are qualified or more
talented at different things but what
I'm worried about is what I said
initially that some people are gonna get
a hold of this stuff quickly and it's
gonna give them an a massive advantage
yes so sort of like I mean if you the
first person that has the ability to go
forward in time five minutes right is
going to be able to manipulate the stock
market and yeah unprecedented way I
don't think that that's really possible
in our lifetime but that's the kind of
thing I'm talking about you'd get so far
ahead right that if we're talking about
competition there will be no catching up
baby you don't have to travel in time to
do that right yeah but there's real
technologies that are likely to happen
which are going to confer billions tens
hundreds of billions of dollars of
benefit of advance yeah yeah and that
stuff is is happening now and this is
the concern with getting behind
countries like China cuz they're already
yeah moving in this direction in terms
of technology yeah so I am a proud
American my father and grandparents came
here as refugees I believe in what this
country at our best stands for I want us
to continue to be the country that's
setting an example for the rest of the
world that is articulating what our
ideals of responsibility and governance
good governance and accountability and
all these things that we've championed
and because of that I want us to get our
act together politically and I want us
to be the leading technological country
in the world and so I think that's
what's what's at stake and we're losing
so much time because there was a time in
the period after the Second World War
where we recognize that technological
leadership was the foundation for
everything else we were we had recreated
the world out of the ashes of the of the
war but we realized that we needed to
have economic growth we needed to have
the competition we needed to have these
technologies and and we it was a miracle
what we've what we've done and now we
we've lost our focus and we
have to regain it the way I look at
humans and the way I look at the human
race today in 2019 it's like we're
driving very fast through fog yeah it's
very difficult to see what's in front of
us yeah when I look back at you know if
you've written HG Wells but some of his
predictions about the future are really
interesting because he he was pretty
close on quite a few findings but that
that vision to be able to sit there and
use your imagination close your eyes and
think what is this going to be like what
is what what we're dealing with now and
that hos - as opposed to what 21 19
right what is which is similar to HG
Wells yeah versus us right what the fuck
is that gonna be like like yeah is there
going to be a time where there are no
diseases there there is no death and
that we just have to regulate population
control in some sort of other manner and
the only way people die they're going to
die from accidents and things along
those lines but but mortality in terms
of old age I mean this is that's a
according to David Sinclair this is a
fixable issue yeah you know when they
fix it they fix it in 20 years or 30
years or 50 years maybe David is a
friend and I have a whole chapter I
don't want to misquote yeah yeah I have
a whole chapter in the book on the the
science of of human life extension so I
think definitely it's real that we're
going to live healthier longer we're
gonna harness our technology of that I
don't think that immortality that
biological immortality is in is in the
cards maybe not immortality because
we'll still be biologically vulnerable
what I have hearts and brains all right
but aging yeah I think we will age
slower and we will live healthier longer
and I think it's it's going to be great
but back to your core point I mean
that's the reason why I also write
science fiction is that the world of
science is changing so fast that we
really need to apply a lot of
imagination to imagine where it's going
because if you're just looking at what's
happening now it's like this train is
gonna speed by you we have to kind of a
magic Wayne Gretzky we have to imagine
where the puck is going to be not where
it is now and I I mentioned George
church who's like he's at Harvard he's
like the living Charles Darwin and I do
a lot of speaking alongside George and
become our little thing that he says
that he reads science fiction like mine
and then imagined says well that's
pretty cool how can we do that and what
I do is I look at the research coming
out of labs like George's and ice
alright well that's where we are now
what's that going to mean in 20 50 100
years and so we have to that the science
fiction plays a more important role than
it ever has in kind of imagining where
we're going and it's that imagining that
allows us to try to say well what if
that's one of the options of where we're
going what are the decisions that we
need to make now so that we can have a
better outcome rather than a worse if
you're gambling person I don't know if
you are but if I had to give you a
hundred bucks to put on something in 20
years it's going to be profoundly just
it changed it's gonna change us in a way
that is something that we are not really
prepared to understand or deal with what
do you think that's gonna be I think
it's going to be predictive genetics
that we're going to have all right now
it's like you go to your doctor when
you're sick you could have been this
could have been some genetic disorder
that you had from the moment you were
conceived and it was ticking and it was
ticking and you showed up 50 years later
when that's been manifest so it's going
to be very different you're taking your
kid home from the hospital your newborn
and the doctor says hey congratulations
this is really great but just FYI your
kid has a 50% greater than average
chance of getting early onset
Alzheimer's 50 years from now hmm and
your cat your kid has a really great
chance of being phenomenal at abstract
math like how are we going to think
about how are we think about what it
means to be human when we have all of
that information and there are things
now that we call fate and it's it's it's
a just a different model and so I think
that and once we have that that's going
to change a lot a lot of things it's
going to fundamentally transform our
healthcare what we call healthcare now
is really sick care you show up with a
symptom this is going to be predictive
and it's going to change the we the way
we make babies because people are going
to have real choices about which embryos
to implant and we're going to have a lot
of information
a lot of really intimate stuff so you
feel like genetic manipulation and
genetic engineering genetic
understanding genetic knowledge and then
applied genetic medicine yeah those are
gonna be the big changes in the next 20
years even more so than technology it's
it's interconnected because these
there's really it's like a super
convergence of these technologies so the
the genetics revolution is the
artificial intelligence revolution in a
sense that the complexity of genetics is
so great it's way beyond what our brains
on their own could process and so really
the way that all these technologies are
touching each other and so the
biological models are now influencing
the AI so for example we are coming to
the limits of silicon storage but DNA
has unlimited storage capacity so it's
the the as I've said before the kind of
the boundaries between biology and AI or
genetics and AI is going to be very
blurry yeah that is an interesting
concept right the idea of storing
information in DNA and that has been
discussed
yeah which the DNA is the greatest
information storage mechanism ever
imagined so the question is what happens
when you do store things in there and
how does that information interact with
all the rest of stuff that's in your
body already well I mean if you can do
it in your body you could doesn't have
to right it doesn't their body just
think of like your your DNA has four
billion years of history and it's done a
great job of recording it it's English
yeah like I have old 8-track tapes they
haven't lasted that is a squirrely
concept that you have all that data
inside your head I mean that's also when
people make when they try to understand
instincts yeah that people have these
are some sort of genetically encoded
memories all right some understanding of
things that are dangerous and that these
that they're in there because this is
how we've learned over the years without
actually having experiences thanks
personally yeah ya know so that's it's
baked in our genetics are baked into us
and so you know I don't know if you've
been to Indonesia before I was in
Indonesia and then with this place
called Komodo Island oh wow the Dragons
the Komodo dragons and it was
fascinating because it's like you can
tell they don't have plaintiffs
attorneys years
walking around there all these Komodo
dragons and so yeah these are like the
most deadly creatures on earth and
there's like some little guy with a
little stick and it's like how effective
is that stick but the way it works too
so you're just walking around I'm just
walking around because the komodo checks
when they're not killing people or
killing em they're just sitting there
okay
do they ever get jacked people ever go
there and get bitten yes and they say
only a few times a year it's like wow
that seems like a years a lot of it but
the way it works for a komodo dragon a
mother lays the egg and then buries the
egg and then forgets where the egg is
and then let's just say that this egg
hatches and this little Komodo dragon
comes out and the mother sees her own
baby Komodo dragon she'll eat it in a
second and so if you're a komodo dragon
you better have your entire survival
strategy baked into your DNA because
nobody's teaching you anything and so
for us we have this sense that it's like
parenting is really important it is
environment is really important it is
but so much of who and what we are is
baked in to our genetics and I think
that's that's going to be this challenge
we're going to see ourselves as
increasingly genetic beings we can't
become genetic determinists think that
we're just genetics but we're going to
know a lot more we're going to demystify
a lot of what it means to be a human
poof yeah teve is right but are we gonna
lose the the romance and the the just
the randomness of life because that
that's what people are concerned with
right yeah like if if we have some sort
of genetic uniformity I mean especially
in particularly with like things like
intelligence and athletic performance
we're not gonna appreciate freaks as
much yeah maybe we'll all want to be
freaks because they're all gonna want
the freaks are the ones who push us and
so I think I'm not gonna want to be a
moron yeah well your question it's it's
the essential question it's like what
makes a human a human isn't just someone
we have higher IQ that doesn't make you
a better human that makes you someone
with a higher IQ but how are we going to
think about constructing societies when
it's up to us like if we are going to
say we value certain people certain
ideas I think we're going to need
artists like right now people like
artists are sometimes in
mainstream sometime they're on the
fringe but artists are going to be maybe
the most important people in this new
world and right like right now in
hospitals we have kind of a hierarchy
and like the most technical people at
the people who are valued the most and
the least technical people like some of
the nurses or nurses aides are the
people who are often valued and paid the
least but when technology can do these
technological feats what's going to be
left is how can we be great humans how
can we a moat how can we connect how can
we create art and if we get swept away
by this tide of science as and you know
how excited I am about the science
beautifully and we could really
undermine our humanity right as for
humans what humans value is many aspects
of that humanity and are the creations
yeah the literature things we when you
read someone's great prose you're
reading like an insight into their mind
and that's what's interesting about it
right you like yes you're not gonna get
that from just ones and zeroes yeah and
that's and there there will always be
this would we call it mystery and even
if we can do a genetic analysis of
Shakespeare and Mozart and and whatever
like it's still miraculous and we need
to celebrate that and we can't we can't
allow us to say that we are just our
genetics or even just our biology but we
also can't just say biology has nothing
to do with it especially because we're
going to know more about our biology and
about our differences and that's that's
normal I mean it used to be in the old
days that everyone thought well God is
weather and now we understand weather
pretty much and nobody's saying oh that
lightning that's God is delivering a
message it could be but we still like we
still have that mystery and I think that
it's in some ways it's about our
orientation like how do we make sure
that we keep this view of life that we
have artists and humanists who are just
at the core of this conversation about
where we're going what if that mystery
ultimately turns out to just be ignorant
and that as you develop more and more
understanding there's less and less
mystery would we like to be less smart
would we like to be or overwhelmed by
possibility I mean it could be I think
those that be part of what romance
it could be and certainly like the
unknown every we wake up every morning
for and we just don't know the answer
and there are some people like going
back to the issues of life extension
there are some people who say well that
death is essential for appreciating life
I talk about this stuff all around and
then there are people who say you know
you're talking about eliminating these
terrible diseases but I know somebody
who had that terrible disease and their
suffering was a gift to everybody else
because we all had more humanity in
response to their suffering like well
that's kind of screwed up I'd prefer
them to not have that suffering but
those people were thinking why it's
wacky but we need to like I totally
agree with you that if we allow
ourselves to get swept away with this
kind of scientific determinism if we
don't say we really value our humanistic
traditions our artists our culture's we
could get lost and we could become
obsolete we could become obviously but
we could also just become less human and
there's something wonderful and there's
magic but do you think that monkeys used
to think man can't become a human we
become less monkey yeah you know you
know I'm saying but no being looks in
the mirror and recognizes that they are
evolving yeah but we've only been Homo
sapiens for about three hundred thousand
years right um so we just it's hard we
know where we've come from because you
see all those little charts from high
school biology but it's really hard for
people to imagine being something else
in the future it's it's it's outside of
our of our consciousness and so say chi
well square yeah and we are monkeys it's
just that we've redefined our monkey
thing you know we do it with a you're a
little different way that's how I was
kind of getting out are you concerned at
all with artificial life are you
concerned about the propagation of
artificial intelligence well there are
different kinds of artificial life so
one is artificial intelligence and I
know people like Elon Musk and and late
Stephen Hawking are afraid terrified
yeah and I think that that we need
whether it's right or not I think it's
great for us to focus on those risks
because if we just say oh that's that's
crazy
and we don't focus on it it increases
the likelihood of these bad things
happening so kudos to to Elon Musk
but I think that we are we're a long way
away from that threat and we are and we
will be enormous beneficiaries of these
technologies and that's why my don't
sound like a broken record but that's
why I keep saying it's all about values
if I think we should take those threats
very seriously and then some users are
so abstract and we don't agree on them
it's true but like like Elon Musk I mean
they've set up this this Institute where
to say well what are the dangers right
and then what are the things that we can
do now what are standards that we can
integrate for example into our computer
programming and and so I mentioned my
World Health Organization Committee the
question is well what are the what are
the standards that we can integrate into
scientific culture it's not going to
cure everything but it may increase the
likelihood of it better rather than
worse outcome but isn't there an
inherent danger in other companies or
other countries rather not complying
with any standards that we set because
it would be anti-competitive yes like
that would that would they would somehow
another diminish competition or diminish
their competitive edge yes
it's true and that's why that's the
balance that we're going to need to need
to hold it's and it's really hard but we
have a window of opportunity now to try
to get ahead of n like we have chemical
weapons biological weapons nuclear
weapons where we've had international
standards that have roughly held I mean
there was a time when slavery was the
norm and there was a movement to say
this is this is wrong and it was largely
successful so we have history of being
more successful rather than than less
and I think that's the goal but you're
right I mean this is a race between the
technology and the best values I'm real
concerned about artificial intelligence
is that this paradigm shifting moment
will happen before we recognize it's
happened yes and then it'll be too late
yes that's exactly right and that's like
I saying that's that's why I've written
the book that's why I'm out on the road
so much talking to people why I why it's
such an honor for me to be and pleasure
for me to be here with you talking about
it cuz we have to reach out to people
people can't be afraid of entering this
conversation because it feels too
technical it feels like it's somebody
else's business this is all of our
business because this is all of our
lives and it's all of our futures so if
in the future you think 20 years that
that's going to really change the most
is predictive genetics and you'd be able
to be able to write predict accurately a
person's health
what do you help in light health and
yeah what do you think is gonna be the
biggest detriment for all this stuff and
the thing that we have to avoid the most
yeah so one is as I mentioned this
determinism just because if we just kind
of take our sense of wonder about what
it means to be a human away like that's
really going to to harm us we talked
about equity and access to these
technologies and and in the technologies
don't even need to be real in order to
have a negative impact so in India there
are no significant genetic differences
between people in different castes but
the caste system has been maintained for
thousands of years because people just
have accepted these these differences so
this it's a whole new way of
understanding what is a human and it's
really going to be complicated and we
aren't ready for it we weren't ready for
it culturally we aren't ready for it
educational ii certainly our political
leaders aren't paying much of any
attention to all of this we have a huge
job
woof so when you sit down and you give
this speech to congress yeah what what
are you anticipating from them in terms
of like what do you think that there's
anything they can do now yeah absolutely
certain step yes so a few things one is
we need to have a national education
campaign I mean this is so important I
would say it's on the future of genetics
revolution and of AI because I think we
just it's it's crazy that we aren't
focusing on these like I I learned
French in in grade school in high school
and I'm happy to speak French but I
would rather have people say this is
really important stuff so that's that's
number one number two is we need to make
sure that we have a functioning
regulatory system in in this country in
every country and I do a lot of
comparative work and like the United
Kingdom they're really well organized
they have a national health care system
which allows them at a national level to
kind of think about long term care and
again trade offs you
this country the average person changes
health plans every 18 months and I was
talking with somebody the other night
and they were they were working on a
predictive health company and they said
their first idea was they were going to
sell this information to health insurers
because like wouldn't this be great if
you could hell if you're a health
insurer and you could you had somebody
who was your client and you could say
hey here's some information you can live
healthier and you're not going to have
this disease 20 years from now and what
he found out is the health insurers they
could have cared less because people
were just they were only going to be
part of it for a year and a half so we
really need to think differently about
how do we invest in people over the
course of their lives and certainly
education is one but thinking long term
about health and well-being is another
what do you think is gonna be the first
technological innovation like in terms
of like what what's already on the
pipeline right you know that's going to
radically alter human beings so
radically I think it's going to be the
end of procreative sex and so when we
stop conceiving our babies through sex
and we're selecting our embryos that's
going to open up this massive realm of
possibility and certainly when we expand
the number of fertilized eggs that we're
choosing from that that is really I
think that's the kind of the killer
application of genetics to the future of
human life do you see that being
attainable to the general population
anytime in the near future like once it
starts once the technology right gets
established it seems like it's going to
be wealthier people that are gonna have
access to it first right well it depends
probably yes but when you think about
right now we have all these people who
are born with these terrible in many
cases deadly genetic diseases and
disorders and what is the societal
expenditure for lifetime care for all
those people I mean this is huge huge
amounts of money so if we were to
eliminate many of not the people but
prevent those disease diseases and
disorders from taking place in the first
place and we could use that money to
provide IVF and embryo screening
everybody using just the economic models
now but then there's another issue that
we have to talk about this it's really
sensitive so I talked a lot about this
but there are and I talk in the book
about people with Down syndrome and I
have a lot of friends who have kids with
Down's with Down syndrome these
wonderful kids and they deserve every
opportunity to thrive the same as as
everybody else and I'm really sensitive
cuz people say well hey if you're and I
say like Down syndrome is largely not
going there aren't going to be newborns
with Down syndrome 10 or 20 years from
now right some people say well what are
you saying about my kids like are you
saying that if this is going to be
eliminated that my kid has a less of a
right to be as somebody else and I
always say absolutely not and we need to
be extremely sensitive that we're not
dehumanizing people but if you have 15
or 15 fertilized eggs in a lab and you
have to pick which one gets implanted in
the mother and one of them will just has
a disease like tay-sachs or sickle-cell
disease where they're going to die
before they're 10 years old would you
choose
affirmative ly choose to implant that
embryo versus the 9 or 14 or whatever
the number is of other ones and so these
are really sensitive things and we can't
be blase about them but we will have
these choices and we're going to have to
figure out how do we make them well I
think there's also a real possibility of
them being able to fix that yeah and
some things will be fixable and some
things won't and to that's that's why
though for these for these single gene
mutation disorders there's a debate I
was speaking in Berkeley the other day
and so I was talking about these two
options one is embryo selection and one
is is gene editing and so there were
different people who got up said oh no
we can do embryo selection that's the
way and that we should look we should
prevent these diseases but yeah gene
editing that's going too far that's
that's playing God and so for different
things there'll be different options do
you when you hear that that yeah that's
going too far
who's usually saying that there's two
groups then one is certainly in the
religious community we're saying well
this is playing God but there's another
kind of it's like a progressive
community who's who are the kinds of
people who are uncomfortable with gently
modified crops people who are saying
that one that the that there's this
slippery slope that once we start making
what are called germline genetic
modification so germline is that our our
sperm eggs and embryos if you make a
change to an adult human it doesn't pass
to their kids if you make a change to a
sperm and egg or an embryo it will pass
on and so there are a lot of people who
are saying we don't understand genetics
well enough to make these changes that
will last forever I'm not in that in
that view I just think that we need to
be cautious and we need to weigh the
been the risks and the benefits of
everything that we do do you think we do
know enough about those changes no it
depends because if we're it depends on
what we're selecting against like if the
thing we're selecting against is some
kind of terrible genetic disease that's
gonna kill somebody when they're a
little kid we have a lot of latitude
because the alternative is is death
right and that's why I was so critical
of this Chinese bio physicist who
created who generally engineered these
two little girls born in China last year
because he wasn't in the gene edits they
weren't probably weren't successful it
wasn't to eliminate some disease or
disorder he was trying to confer the
benefit of increased resistance to HIV
and so I think that we need to be very
mindful and we need to be doing kind of
a cost-benefit analysis of the different
things different interventions and there
was an unintended side effect of this or
they believe a perceived potential
unintended side effect and that's
increased intelligence weights it's a
possibility so so this gene is it's
called a ccr5 is this gene and when it
was disrupted in some mouse studies
those mice became a little bit able to
navigate mazes and so that was what led
people to believe that this disruption
of the ccr5 could potentially lead to
that kind of change in human nobody
really knows there's lots of things that
happen in mice that don't have analogs
in humans and that was why it was so
irresponsible is that this this
scientists in secret made these these
Gina
he didn't get a proper consent from the
parents yeah yes in China because it's
China you just ride yeah I mean he can
say where the parents were all
manipulated and its really yeah and so
that's the thing you so you're exactly
right like we are humans we're nuts as a
species and so and so we need to try to
establish some kind of guide rails
guardrails about what's okay what we're
comfortable with what we're what we're
not now this guy is not operating in an
isolated incidents there's got to be a
shit ton of that going on right now as
we're talking China what do you think is
happening over there you know I think
China has a lot of money they have
brilliant people and they have a
government that is hell-bent on leading
the world in advanced technology yeah
and the scientific culture in China is
just very different than it is here and
so we know what we know but we don't
know what we don't know and that's it's
a really really big deal because China
is in many ways a Wild West and the
technology exists to do some really big
stuff and that's that's why we have to
at least try to establish standards will
we succeed fully no but maybe we can do
better than then worse are you
anticipating seeing like a lot of freaky
things coming out of China
yes whoa you said that very query yeah
no it's I spend a lot of time in China I
and this it's a different man but the
thing with China China had this great
ancient civilization but they destroyed
their own civilization in the Great Leap
Forward and the Cultural Revolution they
burn their books they smash their own
historic relics and so it's really it's
a society in many ways that's starting
from scratch and so all of these norms
that people get inherit through their
traditions China in many ways doesn't
have and so and so it's it's a very
different and China is growing I mean
they are increasingly powerful and China
is going to be a major voice the force
defining the world of the 21st century
that's why America has to get it to act
together
that's a hard concept for us to grasp
when we think about the fact that they
had the Great Wall
all they have so much ancient art and
architecture we just assumed they're a
really old culture they are but they've
wiped it out that's yeah that's why if
you want to see if you want to see great
Chinese art you have to go to Taiwan
because when the Chinese nationalists
left in 1949 when they lost as they were
losing the Civil War they took the
treasures and they put them in the
National Museum of Taiwan in the the
Cultural Revolution the Great Leap
Forward China the Red Guards were just
smashing all of their own stuff their
own ancient history now now the Chinese
Communist Party is saying oh no we're
going back and we have this great five
thousand-year-old culture in some ways
it's true but in some ways it's like an
adolescent culture without these kinds
of restrictions that other societies
have that's such a unique perspective
that I haven't heard before it makes so
much sense in terms of like how frantic
they are restructuring their world yeah
yeah and and they feel that they got
screwed over because there is this this
vague the sense of Chinese greatness we
hear the word Middle Kingdom it's like
China is the center of the world and
everybody else is some kind of tributary
and so they're monumentally pissed off
that these colonial powers came and
overpowered them and they had to make
all these concessions they had to give
land away and and hell-bent on region
regaining and they're playing the long
game
they are playing a long game and we are
not and we have to be mindful that's
also something you can do if you have
complete control of your population you
don't have to worry about people's
opinions or you can just go in the
direction that you feel is gonna benefit
the Chinese power yeah the power that be
wait this is a country run by engineers
we her country run largely by lawyers
and and and reality TV people I guess
yeah but in China is run by engineer so
there are all these problems and the
answer is always engineering so you have
a population problem it's the answer is
the one child policy environmental
problem you have Three Gorges Dam you
don't have water in the north or China
you build this massive biggest water
project in the world from south to north
you want to win in the Olympics you
engineer your population you take kids
away from their families and put them in
their Olympic sport school so I write
about this in Genesis code if you're
China you kind of have this Plato's
Republic model of the world and
we're going to kind of identify the
genetic or maybe manipulate these
genetic superstars to be our greatest
scientists and mathematicians and
business leaders and political leaders
like there's a model that you can
imagine for for how to do it
Wow it makes you really nervous
it should yes that's why like I just
feel like with this country we don't
have time to have all these distractions
we're focusing on junk like what it's
just like all of this I'm on CNN all the
time when I'm when I'm home in New York
and I always say like you guys and I'm
talking about kind of geopolitical
issues China and North Korea what else
hey it's like you guys recognize this is
porn like CNN and MSE B that's like one
kind of porn and Fox and whoever else
Infowars that's another kind of porn but
it's all porn and we're it's kind of
we're drawing people's attention to
these few stories but there's these big
stories that we have to focus on and
certainly the rise of China is such an
essential story for the 21st century
because China is competing in all of
these technologies and China it's a go
go go I mean people in China who were
involved in the tech world when they go
and visit Silicon Valley uniformly they
say we cannot believe these people are
so lazy like why are they not working 24
hours a day why are they not issuing
product new products every every week
and so this is I mean they are racing
somewhere and it's going to have huge
implications for the world and so if we
believe in our values is that I believe
we should we have to fight for them in
the place that we have to fight for them
first is here and we can't you know it's
just like every day that we're just
focusing on this this drama this reality
TV drama of our government is another
day where we're not focusing on the big
things how are we going to get our act
together how are we going to lead the
world and technology I mean if another
example is this is immigration like we
have this whole fight of how do we keep
people out what I'd like to do is to go
to the State Department's all right
every embassy in the world you have a
new job you have to we're going to give
you whatever a number 500 slots per year
you have to you
your country find the 500 most brilliant
talented creative entrepreneurial people
and say we're giving you a green card
we're gonna give you a little starter
money we want you to move to the United
States and just start a life and have
kids and we should be creaming the crowd
skimming the cream over the rest of the
world and like we could take over we
could revitalize this country but we're
having this fight of how do we keep a
small number of refugees out and it's
just we're not focusing on the right
things that's a that's again another
very very interesting perspective we are
we learned about Huawei in this country
really not just well I learned about it
because they put out some pretty
innovative phones and interesting
technology but we learned it because the
State Department was telling people to
stop using their phones yep do you think
that that is trying to stifle the
competition they'd like to try because
the market show that they have if they
do really have pin number the number two
selling cell phones in the world now
that's not from America America is
largely out of that conversation right
and if they were in America they would
probably dominate in America as well
because they're cheaper yeah and they're
really good yeah I mean their phones are
insane there the cameras and their
phones are off the charts yeah they they
put some video of the the zoom
capability of their newest phone and
people are calling bullshit there's like
there's no way that's not possible but
it turned out it was true
yeah they really can it really can zoom
like a super expensive telephoto lens
yeah yeah so wall way it's a complicated
story for sure the founder of Huawei
is a former Chinese military officer for
sure sure in the early stages of their
company they stole straight out stole
lots of source code from companies like
Cisco for sure we should be really
worried if Huawei is the sole supplier
of the infrastructure that supports 5g
all around the world because the Chinese
government would have access to
everything and so that leads us to the
question is one is there a problem with
Huawei itself
and but then two is let's just say and I
in citing the answer to that first
question is probably yes but then the
question to is let's just say why away
is a legit company and they're not
totally intimately connected to the
Chinese government
can we trust their relationship with the
Chinese government the Chinese
government has it ruled that every one
of these companies has the big Chinese
national companies national champion
companies they have a communist party
cell inside of that company and so these
like I think that we can't think of big
Chinese companies just like we think of
companies here we have to think of them
as quasi state actors and that's why
this dis fight that's happening right
now is is so important and that's why
like when China is out investing in
different parts of the world including
Africa their companies are kind of
acting like arms of the government I
mean they're making all kinds of
investments that don't really make sense
if you just see well this is a company
doing something if you say that this is
a company with backing by the state
that's fulfilling a function that
supports the state it's it's just it's a
very different model so I I am actually
quite concerned about about hallway and
and I'm not a fan of everything that
this administration is doing but I think
on China it's important that we need to
stand up and I think pushing back on
hallway is the right thing to do I'm
uncomfortable about this for two reasons
one I'm uncomfortable about that about
the Chinese government being inexorably
connected to this global superpower in
technology but I'm also uncomfortable
that it sets a precedent for other
nations to follow yeah because they look
looked as the only way to compete
because what you were talking about the
investments that Huawei or that the
Chinese government makes in these other
yeah these countries and that don't seem
to make sense if you're just dealing
with their company right but if you're
dealing with somebody's trying to take
over the world yeah it makes a lot of
sense yes and so when we have our
companies that you're out in some place
in Africa and you're competing with a
Chinese company on to do something build
a port or whatever yeah and you're
competing because you are an American
company and so you have your caucus ID
this is the port what's the income
stream going to be about and you have a
certain amount that you can bid because
otherwise it becomes a bad investment
but if the Chinese company is that their
calculus is not is this a good or bad
investment it's what is the state
interest in controlling or quasi
controlling this asset and so that's why
we can't project ourselves onto the
Chinese we can't say they're just like
us just different it's if we have
different models and our models are
competing do you think that we should
avoid huawei products like consumers
should I
I think the government should very
tightly regulate products like huawei
products because some other network like
router
yes exactly they've shown that they
they're using them extract information
and so we've we have a long history of
European Japanese South Korean companies
that have invested very well they've out
competed us and we've we've allowed we
allowed the Japanese companies to
out-compete our auto manufacturers and
that was that was fine in the sense it
are in the 1970s our cars had become
shit because we had this monopoly and so
I'm all for open competition I'm all for
free trade it has to be fair but I think
that what China is doing China
recognized as a state that they could
use the tools of capitalism to achieve
state ends and I think we need to be
very cautious about that mmm that's
interesting that you compare to the
automotive market because the
consequences are so much different right
so much different cuz but we do have a
model to go on we could see what
happened we did we made shitty cars the
Japanese took over and then we made
better cars like I have a rental car
here in Los Angeles and I went to the to
the rental car place at LAX and they had
all of the different cars and there was
like a Nissan and Toyota and there was a
Cadillac and for therefore I thought you
know I said I'm gonna go with the Caddy
it's a great car and something amazing
incredible American cars are very good
now they're great and then so I'd like
I'm all for competition but I just feel
like what Chinese some Chinese companies
are doing it's not competition it's they
have become not all of them but
quasi-state actors and if that's what
they're doing I think we need to respond
to them in that way
interesting what else should we begin
turn with which would be concerned with
anything that North Korea's doing oh
absolutely sorry I have spent a lot of
time in North Korea yes why I brought it
yeah so I've advised the North Korea
actually no working North Korean
governor on the establishment of special
economic zones which I certainly believe
if North Korea could have economic
growth and integrate into the rest of
the world that would be great it so I've
I - you will know this was in 2015 yeah
but I've been there twice across the
border from China and zigzag the country
by land visited ten or twelve different
sites so spent almost two weeks by Lance
I've really incredible I mean North
Korea won it's the most organized place
I've ever seen I mean there's not as any
where there's like on the side of the
road the the stones are all raked
there's not a stick every little line is
drawn it's like total control there were
very in them in the agricultural areas
there were very few machines and very
few farm animals so I saw people pulling
plows like you know usually have the
animal in front of the plow and the
person behind here there were like two
people in front of the plow and one
person behind the people were the
animals and we would go and visit these
just because they didn't they a lot of
animals got eaten when they had their
famine and so we visited these different
sites for these special economic zones
and they would say like what they had
done and what they were thinking about
doing and I would say like how do you do
you know anything about the market like
do you what are you gonna sell here and
they said well we know about clearing
land and building a fence and then we we
went to to Pyongyang and I spoke to
about 400 economic planners and I said
look I know you have these plans that to
do these special economic zones it's
totally going to fail the way it's gonna
work you have to connect to the market
economy you have to empower your workers
you need information flow how else are
you going to learn and adapt so North
Korea it's a really dangerous place and
now it's even more dangerous because
President Trump through it was this kind
of nonsensical Hail Mary in these these
meetings with Kim jong-un there was no
never any indication that the North
Koreans were planning on giving up their
nuclear
they never said they would it's the last
thing they would do because their goal
is survival and so there was this kind
of head-fake which was like a PR stunt
to be able to say art were having these
these meetings and of course the North
Koreans weren't ever going to give up
their nuclear weapons they're still not
so now things are ramping up so North
Korea in the last couple of days has
started firing missiles again the United
States today
MC US military seized a North Korean
ship so we're going back to this very
dangerous place and and so I think we
really need to do a much better job we
need much more consider North Korea it's
really hard and these guys are really
smart I mean I they are they are very
see people say well these guys are poor
they must not be so mean to like it med
like that we're playing cards with them
we've got the whole deck they don't have
it have one card and yet they're there
they're in the game they're holding us
to it to a stalemate and it's really
worrying and why did you go over there
like what yeah what what were you
thinking so I thought a lot about it
because I have a background in human
rights I was a human rights officer for
the United Nations in Cambodia I'm the
child of a refugee I have this very
strong belief in human rights and that
in supporting people in North Korea they
have about a hundred and twenty thousand
people in the most brutal brutal
horrific prison camps and so when I was
asked to be part of this six person
delegation advising them on the special
on the establishment of special economic
zones one instinct was screw them I
don't want to be part of this at all but
I also felt that if North Korea could
have some kind of integrated economic
development that would at least connect
them to the world that would create some
kind of leverage and that would that
would help help people so I decided to
go and I'm glad that I that I did but if
this is these really hard artists people
and it's very unfortunate that in in
president Trump's negotiations with the
North Koreans human rights was never
once mentioned and I think that that's
we
is coming back to values like we have to
be clear about who we are and what we
stand for and be consistent and fighting
for it do you think that Trump didn't
bring that up because he wanted to be
able to effectively communicate with
them and not put them on their heels
maybe but I feel like has had they done
anything that if he thought that there
was a real chance of progress but the
hard thing was he didn't know much about
the North Koreans he has people we have
brilliant people working in the United
States government and all of those
people all of the US intelligence
agencies were telling President Trump
that the North Koreans have absolutely
no intention of giving up their nuclear
weapons right and so maybe he did think
that he would charm Kim jong-un or he
would say hey we're gonna give you
economic development or or whatever but
I think for most people who were
observers of North who had watched it
for I thought that was not so we gave
away a lot so we didn't mention human
rights we suspended our military
exercises we gave them the legitimacy of
a presidential meeting which they've
been wanting for 30 years and we didn't
get anything back so it had we gotten
something back then you could say well
that was a risk for taking maybe mmm
yeah I haven't heard described that way
yeah but I'm agreeing with what you're
saying what do you think he could have
done differently though I don't think
the meeting should have happened with no
no no conditions there were no peace so
if he had said I'm open to meet with the
North Koreans which is something the
North Koreans have always won and we
could have met with the North Koreans
any time immediately for the last 30
years but in order to do it they need to
do this this and this and if they do it
will meet like that would have been a
legitimate thing but what he said is
somebody the the North Korean I mean
side the South Korean national security
advisors peeked into his office and he
goes they they wanted me to go and it
was like sure that seems like an
interesting thing to do and I think that
with this diplomacy you kind of have to
get something and so we gave away so
much upfront and the North Koreans
weren't didn't have an incentive to do
anything in return was his perspective
that it would be better to be in
communication and to be friends with
this guy who's that what I would be but
we have real
interests in the sense that we we have
large military forces in Seoul we have a
lot at stake we have our closest ally
Japan who had citizens abducted and so I
think that was what he thought is like
let's be friendly and then with the
force of personal chemistry everything
will will unlock but I think that was
always extremely unlikely what do you
think is gonna happen to that country I
think eventually and I've written this I
think eventually this regime will
collapse under its own weight but it's
really held out a long time because you
think of the collapse of the Soviet
Union they had another Soviet Union had
enough bullets just survived if they had
said you know we're just gonna shoot
everybody at the Berlin Wall and every
dissenter they would still be the North
Korea has essentially murdered millions
of people so with famine and execution
and and and and prison camps so I think
they're gonna stay for a while but
eventually there will be leaders in
North Korea who will come to the
conclusion that it's safer to oppose the
Kim family than to wait for the Kim
family to come and get you and that
tends to happen in these kind of
totalitarian systems where there's so
little trust there's so little loyalty
Jesus yeah now what is there what are
the conditions like technologically like
what was their infrastructure life so
the general infrastructure is absolutely
terrible I mean they have roads in the
big cities that are actually quite nice
roads because there's no cars and so but
their infrastructure is is terrible I
mean all their their power supply they
they have brownouts blackouts all the
time their manufacturing is all being
decimated so it's terrible but they have
really focused their energy on building
these nuclear weapons because they think
that these nuclear weapons give them
leverage to do things and to extract
concessions and to get to get a bit it's
terrible infrastructure so dude but they
don't have an internet right but they
have something similar but it only
allows them access to a few state-run
websites well average person doesn't
have access to the inner so the way it
works is it's all about loyalty
so you need three or so generations of
loyalty to the Kim family to even set
foot in Pyongyang the capital so really
yes so it's not like you can kind of
move around or whatever it's like just
to be in the capital like you have to
have your loyalty proven and so average
person out in the country they don't
have access to much of anything they
have a little bit more now than they did
in the past and then for this relatively
small number of elites who are in
largely in Pyongyang and in the other
cities which are like there there's a
ring of defense around these cities and
just to enter you have to have all of
these checks some of them have access to
limited internet but it's it's tightly
controlled and it's not like you're kind
of going on Google and look going
whatever you want right they and they
probably would get in trouble if they
googled the wrong thing yes and trouble
it's not just you trouble like if you
trouble if my brother or my uncle does
something that gets me in trouble with
the regime the whole extended family is
out and that means you either you go to
prison camps or you're kicked out of
Pyongyang I mean if this it's all about
collective punishment people are
terrified and by that ruthless
punishment structure that they've set up
that's how they've kept control of the
country yes
and everybody's forced to rat on each
other right yes absolutely yeah yeah
they're they're they're actually they
compelled you know tell on each other
for one thing that you did if you don't
then what if you don't then you are
complicit because they yes so that's and
that's they're these horrible stories
I've met a lot of these of these people
who are in the prison camps like I have
a friend of mine and she was this 13
year old girl and her father was a like
a low-level North Korean official and
then he was accused of something and so
this family that was privileged all of a
sudden was was out and you know just
just these horrible things and prison
and rape and this little I mean now
she's in the United States an incredibly
positive and it's amazing how resilient
she is but this is like a real hell and
it's a written issue and I think that
for us as Americans as humans we're less
human when there are people who are
suffering like this
yeah I agree now you were traveling all
over North Korea what were they having
you do or you were so we would do is we
would go from one of these special
economic zones to the other and in each
one it was kind of the same story get
there there'd be like a big field the
farmers had been kicked off there was a
fence around it and then the group of
the local officials would come and
they'd have like a big chart and they
have a plan like here's where we're
gonna build this building and here's and
I would always ask the same question
like what are you gonna do here why do
you think you're going to be competitive
how do you know what the market prices
are how are your workers going to be
empowered so they can change things I
mean in the old days it used to be you
just kind of have these automaton
workers now workers are actually making
big decisions and fixing things and they
didn't have an answer to any of those
questions and that's what happens when
you have these totalitarian top-down
systems is that like if you being
creative is actually really dangerous so
if somebody says do X you just do X Wow
yeah now it's a it's really incredible
and it's it's so sad because I spend a
lot of time in South Korea and this is
the most dynamic place there's like I
often I go to Seoul just to see what
technology is going to show up here a
few years in the future minutes it Seoul
is like the future and then just 35
miles from Seoul is the Demilitarized
Zone on the other side it's it's
incredible and the real problem would be
once they finally did get free of that
community or of that that that mean you
can call them whatever you want dictator
and that his family what would they what
tools would they have like how prepared
would they be to be our tongue yes well
it's really the good thing the benefit
that they have if there is so here's my
thought of what a scenario of the
scenario might look like amazing it
eventually probably Philby some kind of
coup attempt against the Kim Fowley
let's just say it succeeds but that
would probably result in another
military dictatorship with another group
well we don't know because then I think
immediately I think the Chinese would
invade really yeah because people think
of the
when people think of the Korean War from
the early 1950s they think oh it's the
Korean War it must have been the
Americans fighting against the the
Koreans but the Korean War the two sides
was America and the South Koreans
fighting against the North Koreans and
the Chinese the Chinese did the most of
the of the of the fighting and so China
North Korea is the only country in the
world that has a treaty alliance with
China kind of like we have with Japan
and within with South Korea and so China
their biggest fear is having a reunified
Korean Peninsula
allied to the United States so I think
if there was a coup the Chinese would
immediately move in militarily then
immediately there would be this call to
have some kind of UN body and there
would be a call for a UN Authority and
then I think it would be agreed that the
Chinese would stay and they just would
put on blue helmets like as a UN force
and then we'd have to negotiate what
happens next and I think what the
Chinese would do would be say well we'll
leave when the Americans leave is that I
think that would be what will likely
happen but eventually I think we're
going to see a Korean reunification and
the good news of these reunified
countries like East and West Germany is
there's a whole system of law that is
just use this North Korea will be
swallowed into South Korea and then you
have law you have an infrastructure and
it'll take you know one or two
generations but I think that will
eventually happen and I'm hoping it can
happen without nuclear war
terrible terrible bloodshed but it's
it's going to be a big challenge
god damn yeah that sounds insurmountable
yes hearing you talk about that about
North Korea getting absorbed by South
Korea I'm like oh my god yes look just
yeah imagine just imagine the whole
thing yeah
well listen man spent a fascinating
conversation I really appreciate it I
really appreciate you coming here and
you've certainly sparked a lot of
interesting ideas in my head and I'm
sure a lot of other people's heads as
well and I would like to see down the
line where other saw goes and I hope we
don't get swallowed up by machines we
won't but it's up to us to fight for
what we believe in well thank you very
much my great wish it was like bye
everybody
[Music]
[Applause]